<div class="chapter">
<h2 class="nobreak">TRANSLATOR’S NOTE</h2>
</div>

<p><i>Buddenbrooks</i> was written before the turn of the century;
it was first published in 1902, and became a German
classic. It is one of those novels—we possess many of them
in English—which are at once a work of art and a
unique record of a period and a district. <i>Buddenbrooks</i>
is great in its psychology, great as the monument of a vanished
cultural tradition, and ultimately great by the perfection
of its art: the classic purity and beautiful austerity of
its style.</p>

<p>The translation of a book which is a triumph of style in
its own language, is always a piece of effrontery. <i>Buddenbrooks</i>
is so leisurely, so chiselled: the great gulf of the
war divided its literary method from that of our time.
Besides, the author has recorded much dialect. This difficulty
is insuperable. Dialect cannot be transferred.</p>

<p>So the present translation is offered with humility. It
was necessary to recognize that the difficulties were great.
Yet it was necessary to set oneself the bold task of transferring
the spirit first and the letter so far as might be; and
above all, to make certain that the work of art, coming as it
does to the ear, in German, like music out of the past, should,
in English, at least <i>not</i> come like a translation—which is,
“God bless us, a thing of naught.”</p>

<p class="right">H. T. Lowe-Porter</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<p></p>
<h2 class="nobreak">PART ONE</h2>
</div>
<p></p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">And</span>—and—what comes next?”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, yes, what the dickens does come next? <i>C’est la
question, ma très chère demoiselle!</i>”</p>

<p>Frau Consul Buddenbrook shot a glance at her husband
and came to the rescue of her little daughter. She sat with
her mother-in-law on a straight white-enamelled sofa with
yellow cushions and a gilded lion’s head at the top. The
Consul was in his easy-chair beside her, and the child perched
on her grandfather’s knee in the window.</p>

<p>“Tony,” prompted the Frau Consul, “‘I believe that
God’—”</p>

<p>Dainty little eight-year-old Antonie, in her light shot-silk
frock, turned her head away from her grandfather and stared
aimlessly about the room with her blue-grey eyes, trying hard
to remember. Once more she repeated “What comes next?”
and went on slowly: “‘I believe that God’—” and then, her
face brightening, briskly finished the sentence: “‘created me,
together with all living creatures.’” She was in smooth waters
now, and rattled away, beaming with joy, through the whole
Article, reproducing it word for word from the Catechism just
promulgated, with the approval of an omniscient Senate, in
that very year of grace 1835. When you were once fairly
started, she thought, it was very like going down “Mount
Jerusalem” with your brothers on the little sled: you had
no time to think, and you couldn’t stop even if you wanted
to.</p>

<p>“‘And clothes and shoes,’” she said, “‘meat and drink,
hearth and home, wife and child, acre and cow....’” But
old Johann Buddenbrook could hold in no longer. He burst
out laughing, in a high, half-smothered titter, in his glee at
being able to make fun of the Catechism. He had probably
put the child through this little examination with no other
end in view. He inquired after Tony’s acre and cow, asked
how much she wanted for a sack of wheat, and tried to drive
a bargain with her.</p>

<p>His round, rosy, benevolent face, which never would look
cross no matter how hard he tried, was set in a frame of snow-white
powdered hair, and the suggestion of a pigtail fell over
the broad collar of his mouse-coloured coat. His double chin
rested comfortably on a white lace frill. He still, in his
seventies, adhered to the fashions of his youth: only the lace
frogs and the big pockets were missing. And never in all
his life had he worn a pair of trousers.</p>

<p>They had all joined in his laughter, but largely as a mark
of respect for the head of the family. Madame Antoinette
Buddenbrook, born Duchamps, tittered in precisely the same
way as her husband. She was a stout lady, with thick white
curls over her ears, dressed in a plain gown of striped black
and grey stuff which betrayed the native quiet simplicity of
her character. Her hands were still white and lovely, and
she held a little velvet work-bag on her lap. It was strange
to see how she had grown, in time, to look like her husband.
Only her dark eyes, by their shape and their liveliness, suggested
her half-Latin origin. On her grandfather’s side
Madame Buddenbrook was of French-Swiss stock, though
born in Hamburg.</p>

<p>Her daughter-in-law, Frau Consul Elizabeth Buddenbrook,
born Kröger, laughed the sputtering Kröger laugh and
tucked in her chin as the Krögers did. She could not be
called a beauty, but, like all the Krögers, she looked distinguished;
she moved with graceful deliberation and had a clear,
well-modulated voice. People liked her and felt confidence in
her. Her reddish hair curled over her ears and was piled in a
crown on top of her head; and she had the brilliant white complexion
that goes with such hair, set off with a tiny freckle here
and there. Her nose was rather too long, her mouth somewhat
small; her most striking facial peculiarity was the shape of
her lower lip, which ran straight into the chin without a curve.
She had on a short bodice with high puffed sleeves, that
left exposed a flawlessly modelled neck adorned with a spray
of diamonds on a satin ribbon.</p>

<p>The Consul was leaning forward in his easy-chair, rather
fidgety. He wore a cinnamon-coloured coat with wide lapels
and leg-of-mutton sleeves close-fitting at the wrists, and white
linen trousers with black stripes up the outside seams. His
chin nestled in a stiff choker collar, around which was folded
a silk cravat that flowed down amply over his flowered waistcoat.</p>

<p>He had his father’s deep-set blue observant eyes, though
their expression was perhaps more dreamy; but his features
were clearer-cut and more serious, his nose was prominent
and aquiline, and his cheeks, half-covered with a fair curling
beard, were not so plump as the old man’s.</p>

<p>Madame Buddenbrook put her hand on her daughter-in-law’s
arm and looked down at her lap with a giggle. “Oh,
<i>mon vieux</i>—he’s always the same, isn’t he, Betsy?”</p>

<p>The Consul’s wife only made a motion with her delicate
hand, so that her gold bangles tinkled slightly. Then, with
a gesture habitual to her, she drew her finger across her face
from the corner of her mouth to her forehead, as if she were
smoothing back a stray hair.</p>

<p>But the Consul said, half-smiling, yet with mild reproach:
“There you go again, Father, making fun of sacred things.”</p>

<p>They were sitting in the “landscape-room” on the first
floor of the rambling old house in Meng Street, which the firm
of Johann Buddenbrook had acquired some time since, though
the family had not lived in it long. The room was hung
with heavy resilient tapestries put up in such a way that they
stood well out from the walls. They were woven in soft tones
to harmonize with the carpet, and they depicted idyllic landscapes
in the style of the eighteenth century, with merry
vine-dressers, busy husbandmen, and gaily beribboned shepherdesses
who sat beside crystal streams with spotless lambs
in their laps or exchanged kisses with amorous shepherds.
These scenes were usually lighted by a pale yellow sunset to
match the yellow coverings on the white-enamelled furniture
and the yellow silk curtains at the two windows.</p>

<p>For the size of the room, the furniture was rather scant.
A round table, its slender legs decorated with fine lines of
gilding, stood, not in front of the sofa, but by the wall opposite
the little harmonium, on which lay a flute-case; some
stiff arm-chairs were ranged in a row round the walls; there
was a sewing-table by the window, and a flimsy ornamental
writing-desk laden with knick-knacks.</p>

<p>On the other side of the room from the windows was a glass
door, through which one looked into the semi-darkness of a
pillared hall; and on the left were the lofty white folding
doors that led to the dining-room. A semi-circular niche
in the remaining wall was occupied by the stove, which
crackled away behind a polished wrought-iron screen.</p>

<p>For cold weather had set in early. The leaves of the little
lime-trees around the churchyard of St. Mary’s, across the
way, had turned yellow, though it was but mid-October.
The wind whistled around the corners of the massive Gothic
pile, and a cold, thin rain was falling. On Madame Buddenbrook’s
account, the double windows had already been put in.</p>

<p>It was Thursday, the day on which all the members of the
family living in town assembled every second week, by established
custom. To-day, however, a few intimate friends as
well had been bidden to a family dinner; and now, towards
four o’clock in the afternoon, the Buddenbrooks sat in the
gathering twilight and awaited their guests.</p>

<p>Little Antonie had not let her grandfather interfere with
her toboggan-ride. She merely pouted, sticking out her already
prominent upper lip still further over the lower one.
She was at the bottom of her Mount Jerusalem, but not knowing
how to stop herself, she shot over the mark. “Amen,”
she said. “I know something, Grandfather.”</p>

<p>“<i>Tiens!</i>” cried the old gentleman. “She knows something!”
He made as if he were itching all over with curiosity. “Did
you hear, Mamma? She knows something. Can any one tell
me—?”</p>

<p>“If the lightning,” uttered Tony, nodding her head with
every word, “sets something on fire, then it’s the lightning
that strikes. If it doesn’t, why, then it’s the thunder!” She
folded her arms and looked around her like one sure of applause.
But old Buddenbrook was annoyed by this display of
wisdom. He demanded to know who had taught her such
nonsense. It turned out that the culprit was the nursery
governess, Ida Jungmann, who had lately been engaged
from Marienwerder. The Consul had to come to her defence.</p>

<p>“You are too strict, Papa. Why shouldn’t the child have
her own little ideas about such things, at her age?”</p>

<p>“<i>Excusez, mon cher!... Mais c’est une folie!</i> You
know I don’t like the children’s heads muddled with such
things. ‘The thunder strikes,’ does it? Oh, very well, let it
strike, and get along with your Prussian woman!”</p>

<p>The truth was, the old gentleman hadn’t a good word to say
for Ida Jungmann. Not that he was narrow-minded. He
had seen something of the world, having travelled by coach
to Southern Germany in 1813 to buy up wheat for the Prussian
army; he had been to Amsterdam and Paris, and was too enlightened
to condemn everything that lay beyond the gabled
roofs of his native town. But in social intercourse he was
more apt than his son to draw the line rigidly and give the
cold shoulder to strangers. So when this young girl—she was
then only twenty—had come back with his children from a
visit to Western Prussia, as a sort of charity-child, the old
man had made his son a scene for the act of piety, in which
he spoke hardly anything but French and low German. Ida
was the daughter of an inn-keeper who had died just before
the Buddenbrooks’ arrival in Marienwerder. She had proved
to be capable in the household and with the children, and her
rigid honesty and Prussian notions of caste made her perfectly
suited to her position in the family. She was a person of
aristocratic principles, drawing hair-line distinctions between
class and class, and very proud of her position as
servant of the higher orders. She objected to Tony’s making
friends with any schoolmate whom she reckoned as belonging
only to the respectable middle class.</p>

<p>And now the Prussian woman herself came from the pillared
hall through the glass door—a fairly tall, big-boned girl in
a black frock, with smooth hair and an honest face. She
held by the hand an extraordinarily thin small child, dressed in
a flowered print frock, with lustreless ash-coloured hair and
the manner of a little old maid. This was Clothilde, the
daughter of a nephew of old Buddenbrook who belonged to
a penniless branch of the family and was in business at
Rostock as an estates agent. Clothilde was being brought
up with Antonie, being about the same age and a docile little
creature.</p>

<p>“Everything is ready,” Mamsell Jungmann said. She had
had a hard time learning to pronounce her <i>r</i>’s, so now she
rolled them tremendously in her throat. “Clothilde helped
very well in the kitchen, so there was not much for cook to
do.”</p>

<p>Monsieur Buddenbrook sneered behind his lace frill at
Ida’s accent. The Consul patted his little niece’s cheek and
said: “That’s right, Tilda. Work and pray. Tony ought
to take a pattern from you; she’s far too likely to be saucy
and idle.”</p>

<p>Tony dropped her head and looked at her grandfather from
under her eyebrows. She knew he would defend her—he
always did.</p>

<p>“No, no,” he said, “hold your head up, Tony. Don’t let
them frighten you. We can’t all be alike. Each according
to his lights. Tilda is a good girl—but we’re not so bad,
either. Hey, Betsy?”</p>

<p>He turned to his daughter-in-law, who generally deferred
to his views. Madame Antoinette, probably more from
shrewdness than conviction, sided with the Consul; and thus
the older and the younger generation crossed hands in the
dance of life.</p>

<p>“You are very kind, Papa,” the Consul’s wife said. “Tony
will try her best to grow up a clever and industrious
woman.... Have the boys come home from school?” she
asked Ida.</p>

<p>Tony, who from her perch on her grandfather’s knee was
looking out the window, called out in the same breath: “Tom
and Christian are coming up Johannes Street ... and
Herr Hoffstede ... and Uncle Doctor....”</p>

<p>The bells of St. Mary’s began to chime, ding-dong, ding-dong—rather
out of time, so that one could hardly tell what
they were playing; still, it was very impressive. The big
and the little bell announced, the one in lively, the other in
dignified tones, that it was four o’clock; and at the same
time a shrill peal from the bell over the vestibule door went
ringing through the entry, and Tom and Christian entered, together
with the first guests, Jean Jacques Hoffstede, the poet,
and Doctor Grabow, the family physician.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Herr Jean Jacques Hoffstede</span> was the town poet. He undoubtedly
had a few verses in his pocket for the present occasion.
He was nearly as old as Johann Buddenbrook, and
dressed in much the same style except that his coat was green
instead of mouse-coloured. But he was thinner and more
active than his old friend, with bright little greenish eyes
and a long pointed nose.</p>

<p>“Many thanks,” he said, shaking hands with the gentlemen
and bowing before the ladies—especially the Frau Consul, for
whom he entertained a deep regard. Such bows as his it
was not given to the younger generation to perform; and he
accompanied them with his pleasant quiet smile. “Many
thanks for your kind invitation, my dear good people. We
met these two young ones, the Doctor and I”—he pointed to
Tom and Christian, in their blue tunics and leather belts—“in
King Street, coming home from school. Fine lads, eh, Frau
Consul? Tom is a very solid chap. He’ll have to go into the
business, no doubt of that. But Christian is a devil of a fellow—a
young <i>incroyable</i>, hey? I will not conceal my <i>engouement</i>.
He must study, I think—he is witty and brilliant.”</p>

<p>Old Buddenbrook used his gold snuff-box. “He’s a young
monkey, that’s what he is. Why not say at once that he is to
be a poet, Hoffstede?”</p>

<p>Mamsell Jungmann drew the curtains, and soon the room
was bathed in mellow flickering light from the candles in
the crystal chandelier and the sconces on the writing-desk.
It lighted up golden gleams in the Frau Consul’s hair.</p>

<p>“Well, Christian,” she said, “what did you learn to-day?”
It appeared that Christian had had writing, arithmetic, and
singing lessons. He was a boy of seven, who already resembled
his father to an almost comic extent. He had the same
rather small round deep-set eyes and the same prominent
aquiline nose; the lines of his face below the cheek-bones
showed that it would not always retain its present childlike
fulness.</p>

<p>“We’ve been laughing dreadfully,” he began to prattle, his
eyes darting from one to another of the circle. “What do you
think Herr Stengel said to Siegmund Kostermann?” He bent
his back, shook his head, and declaimed impressively: “‘Outwardly,
outwardly, my dear child, you are sleek and smooth;
but inwardly, my dear child, you are black and foul.’...”
He mimicked with indescribably funny effect not only the
master’s odd pronunciation but the look of disgust on his
face at the “outward sleekness” he described. The whole
company burst out laughing.</p>

<p>“Young monkey!” repeated old Buddenbrook. But Herr
Hoffstede was in ecstasies. “<i>Charmant!</i>” he cried. “If you
know Marcellus Stengel—that’s he, to the life. Oh, that’s
too good!”</p>

<p>Thomas, to whom the gift of mimicry had been denied,
stood near his younger brother and laughed heartily, without
a trace of envy. His teeth were not very good, being small
and yellowish. His nose was finely chiselled, and he strikingly
resembled his grandfather in the eyes and the shape of the
face.</p>

<p>The company had for the most part seated themselves on
the chairs and the sofa. They talked with the children or
discussed the unseasonable cold and the new house. Herr
Hoffstede admired a beautiful Sèvres inkstand, in the shape
of a black and white hunting dog, that stood on the
secretary. Doctor Grabow, a man of about the Consul’s
age, with a long mild face between thin whiskers, was looking
at the table, set out with cakes and currant bread and saltcellars
in different shapes. This was the “bread and salt”
that had been sent by friends for the house-warming; but the
“bread” consisted of rich, heavy pastries, and the salt
came in dishes of massive gold, that the senders might not
seem to be mean in their gifts.</p>

<p>“There will be work for me here,” said the Doctor, pointing
to the sweetmeats and threatening the children with his
glance. Shaking his head, he picked up a heavy salt and
pepper stand from the table.</p>

<p>“From Lebrecht Kröger,” said old Buddenbrook, with a
grimace. “Our dear kinsman is always open-handed. I did
not spend as much on him when he built his summer house
outside the Castle Gate. But he has always been like that—very
lordly, very free with his money, a real cavalier à-la-mode....”</p>

<p>The bell had rung several times. Pastor Wunderlich was
announced; a stout old gentleman in a long black coat and
powdered hair. He had twinkling grey eyes set in a face that
was jovial if rather pale. He had been a widower for many
years, and considered himself a bachelor of the old school,
like Herr Gratjens, the broker, who entered with him. Herr
Gratjens was a tall man who went around with one of his thin
hands up to his eye like a telescope, as if he were examining a
painting. He was a well-known art connoisseur.</p>

<p>Among the other guests were Senator Doctor Langhals
and his wife, both friends of many years’ standing; and
Köppen the wine-merchant, with his great crimson face between
enormous padded sleeves. His wife, who came with
him, was nearly as stout as he.</p>

<p>It was after half-past four when the Krögers put in an
appearance—the elders together with their children; the
Consul Krögers with their sons Jacob and Jürgen, who were
about the age of Tom and Christian. On their heels came the
parents of Frau Consul Kröger, the lumber-dealer Överdieck
and his wife, a fond old pair who still addressed each other
in public with nicknames from the days of their early love.</p>

<p>“Fine people come late,” said Consul Buddenbrook, and
kissed his mother-in-law’s hand.</p>

<p>“But look at them when they do come!” and Johann Buddenbrook
included the whole Kröger connection with a sweeping
gesture, and shook the elder Kröger by the hand. Lebrecht
Kröger, the cavalier à-la-mode, was a tall, distinguished figure.
He wore his hair slightly powdered, but dressed in the
height of fashion, with a double row of jewelled buttons on
his velvet waistcoat. His son Justus, with his turned-up
mustache and small beard, was very like the father in figure
and manner, even to the graceful easy motions of the hands.</p>

<p>The guests did not sit down, but stood about awaiting the
principal event of the evening and passing the time in casual
talk. At length, Johann Buddenbrook the older offered his
arm to Madame Köppen and said in an elevated voice, “Well,
<i>mesdames et messieurs</i>, if you are hungry....”</p>

<p>Mamsell Jungmann and the servant had opened the folding doors
into the dining-room; and the company made its way
with studied ease to table. One could be sure of a good
square meal at the Buddenbrooks’.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">As</span> the party began to move toward the dining-room, Consul
Buddenbrook’s hand went to his left breast-pocket and fingered
a paper that was inside. The polite smile had left his face,
giving place to a strained and care-worn look, and the muscles
stood out on his temples as he clenched his teeth. For appearance’s
sake he made a few steps toward the dining-room, but
stopped and sought his mother’s eye as she was leaving the
room on Pastor Wunderlich’s arm, among the last of her
guests.</p>

<p>“Pardon me, dear Herr Pastor ... just a word with you,
Mamma.” The Pastor nodded gaily, and the Consul drew his
Mother over to the window of the landscape-room.</p>

<p>“Here is a letter from Gotthold,” he said in low, rapid tones.
He took out the sealed and folded paper and looked into her
dark eyes. “That is his writing. It is the third one,
and Papa answered only the first. What shall I do? It came
at two o’clock, and I ought to have given it to him already,
but I do not like to upset him to-day. What do you think?
I could call him out here....”</p>

<p>“No, you are right, Jean; it is better to wait,” said Madame
Buddenbrook. She grasped her son’s arm with a quick,
habitual movement. “What do you suppose is in it?” she
added uneasily. “The boy won’t give in. He’s taken it into
his head he must be compensated for his share in the house....
No, no, Jean. Not now. To-night, perhaps, before we
go to bed.”</p>

<p>“What am I to do?” repeated the Consul, shaking his bent
head. “I have often wanted to ask Papa to give in. I don’t
like it to look as if I had schemed against Gotthold and worked
myself into a snug place. I don’t want Father to look at it
like that, either. But, to be honest ... I am a partner, after
all. And Betsy and I pay a fair rent for the second storey.
It is all arranged with my sister in Frankfort: her husband
gets compensation already, in Papa’s life-time—a quarter
of the purchase price of the house. That is good business:
Papa arranged it very cleverly, and it is very satisfactory
from the point of view of the firm. And if Papa acts so
unfriendly to Gotthold—”</p>

<p>“Nonsense, Jean. Your position in the matter is quite
clear. But it is painful for me to have Gotthold think that
his step-mother looks out after her own children and deliberately
makes bad blood between him and his father!”</p>

<p>“But it is his own fault,” the Consul almost shouted, and
then, with a glance at the dining-room door, lowered his voice.
“It is his fault, the whole wretched thing. You can judge
for yourself. Why couldn’t he be reasonable? Why did
he have to go and marry that Stüwing girl and ... the
shop....” The Consul gave an angry, embarrassed laugh at
the last word. “It’s a weakness of Father’s, that prejudice
against the shop; but Gotthold ought to have respected
it....”</p>

<p>“Oh, Jean, it would be best if Papa would give in.”</p>

<p>“But ought I to advise him to?” whispered the Consul
excitedly, clapping his hand to his forehead. “I am an interested
party, so I ought to say, Pay it. But I am also a partner.
And if Papa thinks he is under no obligation to a disobedient
and rebellious son to draw the money out of the working
capital of the firm.... It is a matter of eleven thousand
thaler, a good bit of money. No, no, I cannot advise him
either for or against. I’d rather wash my hands of the whole
affair. But the scene with Papa is so <i>désagréable</i>—”</p>

<p>“Late this evening, Jean. Come now; they are waiting.”</p>

<p>The Consul put the paper back into his breast-pocket,
offered his arm to his mother, and led her over the threshold
into the brightly lighted dining-room, where the company
had already taken their places at the long table.</p>

<p>The tapestries in this room had a sky-blue background,
against which, between slender columns, white figures of
gods and goddesses stood out with plastic effect. The heavy
red damask window-curtains were drawn; stiff, massive sofas
in red damask stood ranged against the walls; and in each
corner stood a tall gilt candelabrum with eight flaming candles,
besides those in silver sconces on the table. Above the heavy
sideboard, on the wall opposite the landscape-room, hung a
large painting of an Italian bay, the misty blue atmosphere
of which was most effective in the candle-light.</p>

<p>Every trace of care or disquiet had vanished from Madame
Buddenbrook’s face. She sat down between Pastor Wunderlich
and the elder Kröger, who presided on the window side.</p>

<p>“Bon appétit!” she said, with her short, quick, hearty nod,
flashing a glance down the whole length of the table till
it reached the children at the bottom.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">Our</span> best respects to you, Buddenbrook—I repeat, our
best respects!” Herr Köppen’s powerful voice drowned the
general conversation as the maid-servant, in her heavy striped
petticoat, her fat arms bare and a little white cap on the back
of her head, passed the cabbage soup and toast, assisted by
Mamsell Jungmann and the Frau Consul’s maid from upstairs.
The guests began to use their soup-spoons.</p>

<p>“Such plenty, such elegance! I must say, you know how
to do things!—I must say—” Herr Köppen had never visited
the house in its former owner’s time. He did not come of a
patrician family, and had only lately become a man of means.
He could never quite get rid of certain vulgar tricks of speech—like
the repetition of “I must say”; and he said “respecks”
for “respects.”</p>

<p>“It didn’t cost anything, either,” remarked Herr Gratjens
drily—he certainly ought to have known—and studied the
wall-painting through the hollow of his hand.</p>

<p>As far as possible, ladies and gentlemen had been paired
off, and members of the family placed between friends of the
house. But the arrangement could not be carried out in every
case; the two Överdiecks were sitting, as usual, nearly on
each other’s laps, nodding affectionately at one another. The
elder Kröger was bolt upright, enthroned between Madame
Antoinette and Frau Senator Langhals, dividing his pet jokes
and his flourishes between the two ladies.</p>

<p>“When was the house built?” asked Herr Hoffstede
diagonally across the table of old Buddenbrook, who was
talking in a gay chaffing tone with Madame Köppen.</p>

<p>“Anno ... let me see ... about 1680, if I am not mistaken.
My son is better at dates than I am.”</p>

<p>“Eighty-two,” said the Consul, leaning forward. He was
sitting at the foot of the table, without a partner, next to
Senator Langhals. “It was finished in the winter of 1682.
Ratenkamp and Company were just getting to the top of their
form.... Sad, how the firm broke down in the last twenty
years!”</p>

<p>A general pause in the conversation ensued, lasting for
half a minute, while the company looked down at their plates
and pondered on the fortunes of the brilliant family who
had built and lived in the house and then, broken and impoverished,
had left it.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Broker Gratjens, “it’s sad, when you think of
the madness that led to their ruin. If Dietrich Ratenkamp
had not taken that fellow Geelmaack for a partner! I flung
up my hands, I know, when he came into the management.
I have it on the best authority, gentlemen, that he speculated
disgracefully behind Ratenkamp’s back, and gave notes and
acceptances right and left in the firm’s name.... Finally
the game was up. The banks got suspicious, the firm couldn’t
give security.... You haven’t the least idea ... who
looked after the warehouse, even? Geelmaack, perhaps? It
was a perfect rats’ nest there, year in, year out. But Ratenkamp
never troubled himself about it.”</p>

<p>“He was like a man paralysed,” the Consul said. A
gloomy, taciturn look came on his face. He leaned over and
stirred his soup, now and then giving a quick glance,
with his little round deep-set eyes, at the upper end of the
table.</p>

<p>“He went about like a man with a load on his mind; I think
one can understand his burden. What made him take Geelmaack
into the business—a man who brought painfully little
capital, and had not the best of reputations? He must have
felt the need of sharing his heavy responsibility with some
one, not much matter who, because he realized that the end
was inevitable. The firm was ruined, the old family <i>passée</i>.
Geelmaack only gave it the last push over the edge.”</p>

<p>Pastor Wunderlich filled his own and his neighbour’s wineglass.
“So you think my dear Consul,” he said with a discreet
smile, “that even without Geelmaack, things would have
turned out just as they did?”</p>

<p>“Oh, probably not,” the Consul said thoughtfully, not addressing
anybody in particular. “But I do think that Dietrich
Ratenkamp was driven by fate when he took Geelmaack
into partnership. That was the way his destiny was to be fulfilled....
He acted under the pressure of inexorable necessity.
I think he knew more or less what his partner was
doing, and what the state of affairs was at the warehouse. But
he was paralyzed.”</p>

<p>“<i>Assez</i>, Jean,” interposed old Buddenbrook, laying down
his spoon. “That’s one of your <i>idées</i>....”</p>

<p>The Consul rather absently lifted his glass to his father.
Lebrecht Kröger broke in: “Let’s stick by the jolly present!”
He took up a bottle of white wine that had a little silver
stag on the stopper; and with one of his fastidious, elegant
motions he held it on its side and examined the label. “C. F.
Köppen,” he read, and nodded to the wine-merchant. “Ah,
yes, where should we be without you?”</p>

<p>Madame Antoinette kept a sharp eye on the servants while
they changed the gilt-edged Meissen plates; Mamsell Jungmann
called orders through the speaking-tube into the kitchen,
and the fish was brought in. Pastor Wunderlich remarked, as
he helped himself:</p>

<p>“This ‘jolly present’ isn’t such a matter of course as it
seems, either. The young folk here can hardly realize, I
suppose, that things could ever have been different from what
they are now. But I think I may fairly claim to have had a
personal share, more than once, in the fortunes of the Buddenbrook
family. Whenever I see one of these, for instance—”
he picked up one of the heavy silver spoons and
turned to Madame Antoinette—“I can’t help wondering
whether they belong to the set that our friend the philosopher
Lenoir, Sergeant under his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon,
had in his hands in the year 1806—and I think of our meeting
in Alf Street, Madame.”</p>

<p>Madame Buddenbrook looked down at her plate with a smile
half of memory, half of embarrassment. Tom and Tony, at
the bottom of the table, cried out almost with one voice, “Oh,
yes, tell about it, Grandmama!” They did not want the
fish, and they had been listening attentively to the conversation
of their elders. But the Pastor knew that she would not care
to speak herself of an incident that had been rather painful
to her. He came to her rescue and launched out once more
upon the old story. It was new, perhaps, to one or two of
the present company. As for the children, they could have
listened to it a hundred times.</p>

<p>“Well, imagine a November afternoon, cold and rainy, a
wretched day; and me coming back down Alf Street from some
parochial duty. I was thinking of the hard times we were
having. Prince Blücher had gone, and the French were in
the town. There was little outward sign of the excitement that
reigned everywhere: the streets were quiet, and people stopped
close in their houses. Prahl the master-butcher had been shot
through the head, just for standing at the door of his shop
with his hands in his pockets and making a menacing remark
about its being hard to stand. Well, thought I to myself,
I’ll just have a look in at the Buddenbrooks’. Herr
Buddenbrook is down with erysipelas, and Madame has a
great deal to do, on account of the billeting.</p>

<p>“At that very moment, whom should I see coming towards
me but our honored Madame Buddenbrook herself? What a
state she was in! hurrying through the rain hatless, stumbling
rather than walking, with a shawl flung over her shoulders,
and her hair falling down—yes, Madame, it is quite true,
it <i>was</i> falling down!</p>

<p>“‘This is a pleasant surprise,’ I said. She never saw me,
and I made bold to lay my hand on her sleeve, for my mind
misgave me about the state of things. ‘Where are you off to
in such a hurry, my dear?’ She realized who I was, looked at
me, and burst out: ‘Farewell, farewell! All is over—I’m
going into the river!’</p>

<p>“‘God forbid,’ cried I—I could feel that I went white.
‘That is no place for you, my dear.’ And I held her as
tightly as decorum permitted. ‘What has happened?’ ‘What
has happened!’ she cried, all trembling. ‘They’ve got at the
silver, Wunderlich! That’s what has happened! And Jean
lies there with erysipelas and can’t do anything—he couldn’t
even if he were up. They are stealing my spoons, Wunderlich,
and I am going into the river!’</p>

<p>“Well, I kept holding her, and I said what one would in
such cases: ‘Courage, dear lady. It will be all right. Control
yourself, I beg of you. We will go and speak with them.
Let us go.’ And I got her to go back up the street to her
house. The soldiery were up in the dining-room, where
Madame had left them, some twenty of them, at the great
silver-chest.</p>

<p>“‘Gentlemen,’ I say politely, ‘with which one of you may I
have the pleasure of a little conversation?’ ‘They begin
to laugh, and they say: ‘With all of us, Papa.’ But one of
them steps out and presents himself, a fellow as tall as a tree,
with a black waxed moustache and big red hands sticking out
of his braided cuffs. ‘Lenoir,’ he said, and saluted with his
left hand, for he had five or six spoons in his right. ‘Sergeant
Lenoir. What can I do for you?’</p>

<p>“‘Herr Officer,’ I say, appealing to his sense of honour,
‘after your magnificent charge, how can you stoop to this sort
of thing? The town has not closed its gates to the Emperor.’</p>

<p>“‘What do you expect?’ he answered. ‘War is war. The
people need these things....’</p>

<p>“‘But you ought to be careful,’ I interrupted him, for an
idea had come into my head. ‘This lady,’ I said—one will
say anything at a time like that—‘the lady of the house, she
isn’t a German. She is almost a compatriot of yours—she is
a Frenchwoman....’ ‘Oh, a Frenchwoman,’ he repeated.
And then what do you suppose he said, this big swashbuckler?
‘Oh, an <i>emigrée</i>? Then she is an enemy of philosophy!’</p>

<p>“I was quite taken aback, but I managed not to laugh.
‘You are a man of intellect, I see,’ said I. ‘I repeat that I
consider your conduct unworthy.’ He was silent for a moment.
Then he got red, tossed his half-dozen spoons back into
the chest, and exclaimed, ‘Who told you I was going to do anything
with these things but look at them? It’s fine silver. If
one or two of my men take a piece as a souvenir....’</p>

<p>“Well, in the end, they took plenty of souvenirs, of course.
No use appealing to justice, either human or divine. I suppose
they knew no other god than that terrible little Corsican....”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">Did</span> you ever see him, Herr Pastor?”</p>

<p>The plates were being changed again. An enormous brick-red
boiled ham appeared, strewn with crumbs and served with
a sour brown onion sauce, and so many vegetables that the
company could have satisfied their appetites from that one
vegetable-dish. Lebrecht Kröger undertook the carving, and
skilfully cut the succulent slices, with his elbows slightly
elevated and his two long forefingers laid out along the back
of the knife and fork. With the ham went the Frau Consul’s
celebrated “Russian jam,” a pungent fruit conserve flavoured
with spirits.</p>

<p>No, Pastor Wunderlich regretted to say that he had never
set eyes on Bonaparte. Old Buddenbrook and Jean Jacques
Hoffstede had both seen him face to face, one in Paris just
before the Russian campaign, reviewing the troops at the
Tuileries; the other in Dantzig.</p>

<p>“I must say, he wasn’t a very cheerful person to look at,”
said the poet, raising his brows, as he disposed of a forkful
of ham, potato, and sprouts. “But they say he was in a lively
mood, at Dantzig. There was a story they used to tell, about
how he would gamble all day with the Germans, and make
them pay up too, and then spend the evening playing with his
generals. Once he swept a handful of gold off the table, and
said: ‘<i>Les Allemands aiment beaucoup ces petits Napoléons,
n’est-ce pas</i>, Rapp?’ ‘<i>Oui, Sire, plus que le Grand!</i>’ Rapp
answered.”</p>

<p>There was general laughter—Hoffstede had told the story
very prettily, even mimicking the Emperor’s manner. Old
Buddenbrook said: “Well, joking aside, one can’t help having
respect for his personal greatness.... What a nature!”</p>

<p>The Consul shook his head gravely.</p>

<p>“No, no—we of the younger generation do not see why we
should revere the man who murdered the Duc d’Engien, and
butchered eight hundred prisoners in Egypt....”</p>

<p>“All that is probably exaggerated and overdrawn,” said
Pastor Wunderlich. “The Duke was very likely a feather-brained
and seditious person, and as for the prisoners, their
execution was probably the deliberate and necessary policy
of a council of war.” And he went on to speak of a book at
which he had been looking, by one of the Emperor’s secretaries,
which had appeared some years before and was well
worth reading.</p>

<p>“All the same,” persisted the Consul, snuffing a flickering
candle in the sconce in front of him, “I cannot understand it—I
cannot understand the admiration people have for this
monster. As a Christian, as a religious man, I can find no
room in my heart for such a feeling.”</p>

<p>He had, as he spoke, the slightly inclined head and the rapt
look of a man in a vision. His father and Pastor Wunderlich
could be seen to exchange the smallest of smiles.</p>

<p>“Well, anyhow,” grinned the old man, “the little napoleons
aren’t so bad, eh? My son has more enthusiasm for Louis
Philippe,” he said to the company in general.</p>

<p>“Enthusiasm?” repeated Jean Jacques Hoffstede, rather sarcastically....
“That is a curious juxtaposition, Philippe Égalité
and enthusiasm....”</p>

<p>“God knows, I feel we have much to learn from the July
Monarchy,” the Consul said, with serious zeal. “The friendly
and helpful attitude of French constitutionalism toward the
new, practical ideals and interests of our time ... is something
we should be deeply thankful for....”</p>

<p>“Practical ideals—well, ye-es—” The elder Buddenbrook
gave his jaws a moment’s rest and played with his gold snuff-box.
“Practical ideals—well—h’m—they don’t appeal to
me in the least.” He dropped into dialect, out of sheer vexation.
“We have trade schools and technical schools and
commercial schools springing up on every corner; the high
schools and the classical education suddenly turn out to be
all foolishness, and the whole world thinks of nothing but
mines and factories and making money.... That’s all very
fine, of course. But in the long run, pretty stupid, isn’t
it?... I don’t know why, but it irritates me like the
deuce.... I don’t mean, Jean, that the July Monarchy is
not an admirable régime....”</p>

<p>Senator Langhals, as well as Gratjens and Köppen, stood
by the Consul.... They felt that high praise was due to the
French government, and to similar efforts that were being
made in Germany. It was worthy of all respect—Herr Köppen
called it “respeck.” He had grown more and more crimson
from eating, and puffed audibly as he spoke. Pastor
Wunderlich had not changed colour; he looked as pale, refined,
and alert as ever, while drinking down glass after glass
of wine.</p>

<p>The candles burned down slowly in their sockets. Now
and then they flickered in a draught and dispersed a faint
smell of wax over the table.</p>

<p>There they all sat, on heavy, high-backed chairs, consuming
good heavy food from good heavy silver plate, drinking full-bodied
wines and expressing their views freely on all subjects.
When they began to talk shop, they slipped unconsciously
more and more into dialect, and used the clumsy but comfortable
idioms that seemed to embody to them the business
efficiency and the easy well-being of their community.
Sometimes they even used an overdrawn pronunciation by
way of making fun of themselves and each other, and relished
their clipped phrases and exaggerated vowels with the same
heartiness as they did their food.</p>

<p>The ladies had not long followed the discussion. Madame
Kröger gave them the cue by setting forth a tempting method
of boiling carp in red wine. “You cut it into nice pieces,
my dear, and put it in the saucepan, add some cloves, and
onions, and a few rusks, a little sugar, and a spoonful of
butter, and set it on the fire.... But don’t wash it, on any
account. All the blood must remain in it.”</p>

<p>The elder Kröger was telling the most delightful stories;
and his son Justus, who sat with Dr. Grabow down at the
bottom of the table, near the children, was chaffing Mamsell
Jungmann. She screwed up her brown eyes and stood her
knife and fork upright on the table and moved them back and
forth. Even the Överdiecks were very lively. Old Frau
Överdieck had a new pet name for her husband: “You good
old bell-wether,” she said, and laughed so hard that her cap
bobbed up and down.</p>

<p>But all the various conversations around the table flowed
together in one stream when Jean Jacques Hoffstede embarked
upon his favourite theme, and began to describe the Italian
journey which he had taken fifteen years before with a rich
Hamburg relative. He told of Venice, Rome, and Vesuvius, of
the Villa Borghese, where Goethe had written part of his
Faust; he waxed enthusiastic over the beautiful Renaissance
fountains that wafted coolness upon the warm Italian air,
and the formal gardens through the avenues of which it was
so enchanting to stroll. Some one mentioned the big wilderness
of a garden outside the Castle Gate, that belonged to the
Buddenbrooks.</p>

<p>“Upon my word,” the old man said, “I still feel angry with
myself that I have never put it into some kind of order. I
was out there the other day—and it is really a disgrace, a perfect
primeval forest. It would be a pretty bit of property,
if the grass were cut and the trees trimmed into formal shapes.”</p>

<p>The Consul protested strenuously. “Oh, no, Papa! I love
to go out there in the summer and walk in the undergrowth;
it would quite spoil the place to trim and prune its free
natural beauty.”</p>

<p>“But, deuce take it, the free natural beauty belongs to me—haven’t
I the right to put it in order if I like?”</p>

<p>“Ah, Father, when I go out there and lie in the long grass
among the undergrowth, I have a feeling that I belong to
nature and not she to me....”</p>

<p>“Krishan, don’t eat too much,” the old man suddenly
called out, in dialect. “Never mind about Tilda—it doesn’t
hurt her. She can put it away like a dozen harvest hands,
that child!”</p>

<p>And truly it was amazing, the prowess of this scraggy child
with the long, old-maidish face. Asked if she wanted more
soup, she answered in a meek drawling voice: “Ye-es,
ple-ase.” She had two large helpings both of fish and ham,
with piles of vegetables; and she bent short-sightedly over
her plate, completely absorbed in the food, which she chewed
ruminantly, in large mouthfuls. “Oh, Un-cle,” she replied,
with amiable simplicity, to the old man’s gibe, which did
not in the least disconcert her. She ate: whether it tasted
good or not, whether they teased her or not, she smiled
and kept on, heaping her plate with good things, with the
instinctive, insensitive voracity of a poor relation—patient,
persevering, hungry, and lean.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">And</span> now came, in two great cut-glass dishes, the “Plettenpudding.”
It was made of layers of macaroons, raspberries,
lady-fingers, and custard. At the same time, at the other end
of the table, appeared the blazing plum-pudding which was
the children’s favourite sweet.</p>

<p>“Thomas, my son, come here a minute,” said Johann Buddenbrook,
taking his great bunch of keys from his trousers
pocket. “In the second cellar to the right, the second bin,
behind the red Bordeaux, two bottles—you understand?”
Thomas, to whom such orders were familiar, ran off and
soon came back with the two bottles, covered with dust and
cobwebs; and the little dessert-glasses were filled with sweet,
golden-yellow malmsey from these unsightly receptacles.
Now the moment came when Pastor Wunderlich rose, glass
in hand, to propose a toast; and the company fell silent to
listen. He spoke in the pleasant, conversational tone which
he liked to use in the pulpit; his head a little on one side,
a subtle, humorous smile on his pale face, gesturing easily
with his free hand. “Come, my honest friends, let us honour
ourselves by drinking a glass of this excellent liquor to the
health of our host and hostess in their beautiful new home.
Come, then—to the health of the Buddenbrook family, present
and absent! May they live long and prosper!”</p>

<p>“Absent?” thought the Consul to himself, bowing as the
company lifted their glasses. “Is he referring to the Frankfort
Buddenbrooks, or perhaps the Duchamps in Hamburg—or
did old Wunderlich really mean something by that?” He
stood up and clinked glasses with his father, looking him
affectionately in the eye.</p>

<p>Broker Gratjens got up next, and his speech was rather long-winded;
he ended by proposing in his high-pitched voice
a health to the firm of Johann Buddenbrook, that it
might continue to grow and prosper and do honour to the
town.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook thanked them all for their kindness,
first as head of the family and then as senior partner of the
firm—and sent Thomas for another bottle of Malmsey. It
had been a mistake to suppose that two would be enough.</p>

<p>Lebrecht Kröger spoke too. He took the liberty of remaining
seated, because it looked less formal, and gestured with
his head and hands most charmingly as he proposed a toast
to the two ladies of the family, Madame Antoinette and the
Frau Consul. As he finished, the Plettenpudding was nearly
consumed, and the Malmsey nearing its end; and then, to a
universal, long-drawn “Ah-h!” Jean Jacques Hoffstede rose
up slowly, clearing his throat. The children clapped their
hands with delight.</p>

<p>“<i>Excusez!</i> I really couldn’t help it,” he began. He put
his finger to his long sharp nose and drew a paper from his
coat pocket.... A profound silence reigned throughout the
room.</p>

<p>His paper was gaily parti-coloured. On the outside of it
was written, in an oval border surrounded by red flowers and
a profusion of gilt flourishes:</p>

<div class="blockquot">

<p>“<i>On the occasion of my friendly participation in a delightful house-warming
party given by the Buddenbrook family. October 1835.</i>”</p>
</div>

<p>He read this aloud first; then turning the paper over, he
began, in a voice that was already somewhat tremulous:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">Honoured friends, my modest lay</div>
<div class="verse">Hastes to greet you in these walls:</div>
<div class="verse">May kind Heaven grant to-day</div>
<div class="verse">Blessing on their spacious halls.</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">Thee, my friend with silver hair,</div>
<div class="verse">And thy faithful, loving spouse,</div>
<div class="verse">And your children young and fair—</div>
<div class="verse">I salute you, and your house.</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">Industry and beauty chaste</div>
<div class="verse">See we linked in marriage band:</div>
<div class="verse">Venus Anadyomene</div>
<div class="verse">And cunning Vulcan’s busy hand.</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">May no future storms dismay</div>
<div class="verse">With unkind blast the joyful hour;</div>
<div class="verse">May each new returning day</div>
<div class="verse">Blessings on your pathway shower.</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">Ceaselessly shall I rejoice</div>
<div class="verse">O’er the fortune that is yours:</div>
<div class="verse">As to-day I lift my voice,</div>
<div class="verse">May I still, while life endures.</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">In your splendid walls live well,</div>
<div class="verse">And cherish with affection true</div>
<div class="verse">Him who in his humble cell</div>
<div class="verse">Penned to-day these lines for you</div>
</div></div></div>

<p>He bowed to a unanimous outburst of applause.</p>

<p>“Charming, Hoffstede,” cried old Buddenbrook. “It was
too charming for words. I drink your health.”</p>

<p>But when the Frau Consul touched glasses with the poet,
a delicate blush mantled her cheek; for she had seen the
courtly bow he made in her direction when he came to the
part about the Venus Anadyomene.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> general merriment had now reached its height. Herr
Köppen felt a great need to unfasten a few buttons of his
waistcoat; but it obviously wouldn’t do, for not even the elderly
gentlemen were permitting themselves the liberty. Lebrecht
Kröger sat up as straight as he did at the beginning;
Pastor Wunderlich’s face was as pale as ever, his manner as
correct. The elder Buddenbrook had indeed sat back a little
in his chair, but he maintained perfect decorum. There was
only Justus Kröger—he was plainly a little overtaken.</p>

<p>But where was Dr. Grabow? The butter, cheese and fruit
had just been handed round; and the Frau Consul rose from
her chair and unobtrusively followed the waitress from the
room; for the Doctor, Mamsell Jungmann, and Christian were
no longer in their places, and a smothered wail was proceeding
from the hall. There in the dim light, little Christian
was half-lying, half-crouching on the round settee that
encircled the central pillar. He was uttering heart-breaking
groans. Ida and the Doctor stood beside him.</p>

<p>“Oh dear, oh dear,” said she, “the poor child is very bad!”</p>

<p>“I’m ill, Mamma, damned ill,” whimpered Christian, his
little deep-set eyes darting back and forth, and his big nose
looking bigger than ever. The “damned” came out in a tone
of utter despair; but the Frau Consul said: “If we use such
words, God will punish us by making us suffer still more!”</p>

<p>Doctor Grabow felt the lad’s pulse. His kindly face grew
longer and gentler.</p>

<p>“It’s nothing much, Frau Consul,” he reassured her. “A
touch of indigestion.” He prescribed in his best bed-side manner:
“Better put him to bed and give him a Dover powder—perhaps
a cup of camomile tea, to bring out the perspiration....
And a rigorous diet, you know, Frau Consul. A
little pigeon, a little French bread....”</p>

<p>“I don’t want any pigeon,” bellowed Christian angrily. “I
don’t want to eat anything, ever any more. I’m ill, I tell
you, damned ill!” The fervour with which he uttered the
bad word seemed to bring him relief.</p>

<p>Doctor Grabow smiled to himself—a thoughtful, almost a
melancholy smile. He would soon eat again, this young man.
He would do as the rest of the world did—his father, and all
their relatives and friends: he would lead a sedentary life
and eat four good, rich, satisfying meals a day. Well, God
bless us all! He, Friedrich Grabow, was not the man to upset
the habits of these prosperous, comfortable tradesmen and
their families. He would come when he was sent for, prescribe
a few days’ diet—a little pigeon, a slice of French
bread—yes, yes, and assure the family that it was nothing
serious this time. Young as he was, he had held the head of
many an honest burgher who had eaten his last joint of smoked
meat, his last stuffed turkey, and, whether overtaken unaware
in his counting-house or after a brief illness in his
solid old four-poster, had commended his soul to God. Then
it was called paralysis, a “stroke,” a sudden death. And he,
Friedrich Grabow, could have predicted it, on all of these occasions
when it was “nothing serious this time”—or perhaps
at the times when he had not even been summoned, when
there had only been a slight giddiness after luncheon. Well,
God bless us all! He, Friedrich Grabow, was not the man to
despise a roast turkey himself. That ham with onion sauce
had been delicious, hang it! And the Plettenpudding, when
they were already stuffed full—macaroons, raspberries, custard....
“A rigorous diet, Frau Consul, as I say. A little
pigeon, a little French bread....”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">They</span> were rising from table.</p>

<p>“Well, ladies and gentlemen, <i>gesegnete Mahlzeit!</i> Cigars
and coffee in the next room, and a liqueur if Madame feels
generous.... Billiards for whoever chooses. Jean, you will
show them the way back to the billiard-room? Madame
Köppen, may I have the honour?”</p>

<p>Full of well-being, laughing and chattering, the company
trooped back through the folding doors into the landscape-room.
The Consul remained behind, and collected about him
the gentlemen who wanted to play billiards.</p>

<p>“You won’t try a game, Father?”</p>

<p>No, Lebrecht Kröger would stop with the ladies, but Justus
might go if he liked.... Senator Langhals, Köppen, Gratjens,
and Doctor Grabow went with the Consul, and Jean
Jacques Hoffstede said he would join them later. “Johann
Buddenbrook is going to play the flute,” he said. “I must
stop for that. <i>Au revoir, messieurs.</i>”</p>

<p>As the gentlemen passed through the hall, they could hear
from the landscape-room the first notes of the flute, accompanied
by the Frau Consul on the harmonium: an airy, charming
little melody that floated sweetly through the lofty rooms.
The Consul listened as long as he could. He would have
liked to stop behind in an easy-chair in the landscape-room
and indulge the reveries that the music conjured up; but his
duties as host....</p>

<p>“Bring some coffee and cigars into the billiard-room,” he
said to the maid whom he met in the entry.</p>

<p>“Yes, Line, coffee!” Herr Köppen echoed, in a rich, well-fed
voice, trying to pinch the girl’s red arm. The <i>c</i> came
from far back in his throat, as if he were already swallowing
the coffee.</p>

<p>“I’m sure Madame Köppen saw you through the glass,” Consul
Kröger remarked.</p>

<p>“So you live up there, Buddenbrook?” asked Senator Langhals.
To the right a broad white staircase with a carved
baluster led up to the sleeping-chambers of the Consul’s family
in the second storey; to the left came another row of rooms.
The party descended the stairs, smoking, and the Consul halted
at the landing.</p>

<p>“The entresol has three rooms,” he explained—“the
breakfast-room, my parents’ sleeping-chamber, and a third
room which is seldom used. A corridor runs along all three....
This way, please. The wagons drive through the entry;
they can go all the way out to Bakers’ Alley at the back.”</p>

<p>The broad echoing passageway below was paved with great
square flagstones. At either end of it were several offices.
The odour of the onion sauce still floated out from the kitchen,
which, with the entrance to the cellars, lay on the left of
the steps. On the right, at the height of a storey above the
passageway, a scaffolding of ungainly but neatly varnished
rafters thrust out from the wall, supporting the servants’ quarters
above. A sort of ladder which led up to them from the
passage was their only means of ingress or egress. Below the
scaffolding were some enormous old cupboards and a carved
chest.</p>

<p>Two low, worn steps led through a glass door out to the
courtyard and the small wash-house. From here you could
look into the pretty little garden, which was well laid out,
though just now brown and sodden with the autumn rains, its
beds protected with straw mats against the cold. At the other
end of the garden rose the “portal,” the rococo façade of
the summer house. From the courtyard, however, the party
took the path to the left, leading between two walls through
another courtyard to the annexe.</p>

<p>They entered by slippery steps into a cellar-like vault with
an earthen floor, which was used as a granary and provided
with a rope for hauling up the sacks. A pair of stairs led up
to the first storey, where the Consul opened a white door and
admitted his guests to the billiard-room.</p>

<p>It was a bare, severe-looking room, with stiff chairs ranged
round the sides. Herr Köppen flung himself exhausted into
one of them. “I’ll look on for a while,” said he, brushing the
wet from his coat. “It’s the devil of a Sabbath day’s journey
through your house, Buddenbrook!”</p>

<p>Here too the stove was burning merrily, behind a brass
lattice. Through the three high, narrow windows one looked
out over red roofs gleaming with the wet, grey gables and
courtyards.</p>

<p>The Consul took the cues out of the rack. “Shall we play
a <i>carambolage</i>, Senator?” he asked. He went around and
closed the pockets on both tables. “Who is playing with us?
Gratjens? The Doctor? All right. Then will you take the
other table, Gratjens and Justus? Köppen, you’ll have to
play.”</p>

<p>The wine-merchant stood up and listened, with his mouth
full of smoke. A violent gust of wind whistled between the
houses, lashed the window-panes with rain, and howled down
the chimney.</p>

<p>“Good Lord!” he said, blowing out the smoke. “Do you
think the <i>Wullenwewer</i> will get into port, Buddenbrook?
What abominable weather!”</p>

<p>Yes, and the news from Travemünde was not of the best,
Consul Kröger agreed, chalking his cue. Storms everywhere
on the coast. Nearly as bad as in 1824, the year of the great
flood in St. Petersburg. Well, here was the coffee.</p>

<p>They poured it out and drank a little and began their game.
The talk turned upon the Customs Union, and Consul Buddenbrook
waxed enthusiastic.</p>

<p>“An inspiration, gentlemen,” he said. He finished a shot
and turned to the other table, where the topic had begun.
“We ought to join at the earliest opportunity.”</p>

<p>Herr Köppen disagreed. He fairly snorted in opposition.
“How about our independence?” he asked incensed, supporting
himself belligerently on his cue. “How about our self-determination?
Would Hamburg consent to be a party to
this Prussian scheme? We might as well be annexed at once!
Heaven save us, what do we want of a customs union?
Aren’t we well enough as we are?”</p>

<p>“Yes, you and your red wine, Köppen. And the Russian
products are all right. But there is little or nothing else imported.
As for exports, well, we send a little corn to Holland
and England, it is true. But I think we are far from being
well enough as we are. In days gone by a very different business
went on. Now, with the Customs Union, the Mecklenburgs
and Schleswig-Holstein would be opened up—and private
business would increase beyond all reckoning....”</p>

<p>“But look here, Buddenbrook,” Gratjens broke in, leaning
far over the table and shifting his cue in his bony hand as he
took careful aim, “I don’t get the idea. Certainly our own
system is perfectly simple and practical. Clearing on the
security of a civic oath—”</p>

<p>“A fine old institution,” the Consul admitted.</p>

<p>“Do you call it fine, Herr Consul?” Senator Langhals spoke
with some heat. “I am not a merchant; but to speak
frankly—well, I think this civic oath business has become little
short of a farce: everybody makes light of it, and the State
pockets the loss. One hears things that are simply scandalous.
I am convinced that our entry into the Customs Union,
so far as the Senate is concerned—”</p>

<p>Herr Köppen flung down his cue. “Then there will be a
conflick,” he said heatedly, forgetting to be careful with his
pronunciation. “I know what I’m sayin’—God help you, but
you don’t know what you’re talkin’ about, beggin’ your pardon.”</p>

<p>Well, thank goodness! thought the rest of the company,
as Jean Jacques entered at this point. He and Pastor
Wunderlich came together, arm in arm, two cheerful, unaffected
old men from another and less troubled age.</p>

<p>“Here, my friends,” he began. “I have something for you:
a little rhymed epigram from the French.”</p>

<p>He sat down comfortably opposite the billiard-players, who
leaned upon their cues across the tables. Drawing a paper
from his pocket and laying his long finger with the signet
ring to the side of his pointed nose, he read aloud, with a
mock-heroic intonation:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“When the Maréchal Saxe and the proud Pompadour</div>
<div class="verse">Were driving out gaily in gilt coach and four,</div>
<div class="verse">Frelon spied the pair: ‘Oh, see them,’ he cried:</div>
<div class="verse">‘The sword of our king—and his sheath, side by side.’”</div>
</div></div>

<p>Herr Köppen looked disconcerted for a minute. Then he
dropped the “conflick” where it was and joined in the hearty
laughter that echoed to the ceiling of the billiard-room. Pastor
Wunderlich withdrew to the window, but the movement of
his shoulders betrayed that he was chuckling to himself.</p>

<p>Herr Hoffstede had more ammunition of the same sort in
his pocket, and the gentlemen remained for some time in the
billiard-room. Herr Köppen unbuttoned his waistcoat all the
way down, and felt much more at ease here than in the dining-room.
He gave vent to droll low-German expressions at every
turn, and at frequent intervals began reciting to himself with
enormous relish:</p>

<p class="center">“When the Maréchal Saxe....”</p>

<p>It sounded quite different in his harsh bass.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">It</span> was rather late, nearly eleven, when the party began to
break up. They had reassembled in the landscape-room, and
they all made their adieux at the same time. The Frau Consul,
as soon as her hand had been kissed in farewell, went
upstairs to see how Christian was doing. To Mamsell Jungmann
was left the supervision of the maids as they set things
to rights and put away the silver. Madame Antoinette retired
to the entresol. But the Consul accompanied his guests
downstairs, across the entry, and outside the house.</p>

<p>A high wind was driving the rain slantwise through the
streets as the old Krögers, wrapped in heavy fur mantles,
slipped as fast as they could into their carriage. It had been
waiting for hours before the door. The street was lighted
by the flickering yellow rays from oil lamps hanging on posts
before the houses or suspended on heavy chains across the
streets. The projecting fronts of some of the houses jutted
out into the roadway; others had porticos or raised benches
added on. The street ran steeply down to the River Trave;
it was badly paved, and sodden grass sprang up between the
cracks. The church of St. Mary’s was entirely shrouded in
rain and darkness.</p>

<p>“<i>Merci</i>,” said Lebrecht Kröger, shaking the Consul’s hand
as he stood by the carriage door. “<i>Merci</i>, Jean; it was too
charming!” The door slammed, and the carriage drove off.
Pastor Wunderlich and Broker Gratjens expressed their thanks
and went their way. Herr Köppen, in a mantle with a five-fold
cape and a broad grey hat, took his plump wife on his
arm and said in his gruff bass: “G’night, Buddenbrook. Go
in, go in; don’t catch cold. Best thanks for everything—don’t
know when I’ve fed so well! So you like my red wine
at four marks? Well, g’night, again.”</p>

<p>The Köppens went in the same direction as the Krögers,
down toward the river; Senator Langhals, Doctor Grabow, and
Jean Jacques Hoffstede turned the other way. Consul Buddenbrook
stood with his hands in his trousers pockets and
listened to their footsteps as they died away down the empty,
damp, dimly-lighted street. He shivered a little in his light
clothes as he stood there a few paces from his own house, and
turned to look up at its grey gabled façade. His eyes lingered
upon the motto carved in the stone over the entrance, in
antique lettering: <i>Dominus providebit</i>—“The Lord will provide.”
He bowed his head a little and went in, bolting the
door carefully behind him. Then he locked the vestibule door
and walked slowly across the echoing floor of the great entry.
The cook was coming down the stairs with a tray of glasses
in her hands, and he asked her, “Where’s the master, Trina?”</p>

<p>“In the dining-room, Herr Consul,” said she, and her face
went as red as her arms, for she came from the country and
was very bashful.</p>

<p>As he passed through the dark hall, he felt in his pocket
for the letter. Then he went quickly into the dining-room,
where a few small candle-ends in one of the candelabra cast
a dim light over the empty table. The sour smell of the
onion sauce still hung on the air.</p>

<p>Over by the windows Johann Buddenbrook was pacing
comfortably up and down, with his hands behind his back.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER X</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">Well</span>, Johann, my son, where are you going?” He stood
still and put his hand out to his son—his white Buddenbrook
hand, a little too short, though finely modelled. His active
figure showed indistinctly against the dark-red curtains, the
only gleams of white being from his powdered hair and the
lace frill at his throat.</p>

<p>“Aren’t you sleepy? I’ve been here listening to the wind;
the weather is something fearful. Captain Kloot is on his
way from Riga....”</p>

<p>“Oh, Father, with God’s help all will be well.”</p>

<p>“Well, do you think I can depend on that? I know you
are on intimate terms with the Almighty—”</p>

<p>The Consul felt his courage rise at this display of good
humour.</p>

<p>“Well, to get to the point,” he began, “I came in here not
to bid you good night, but to—you won’t be angry, will you,
Papa?... I didn’t want to disturb you with this letter on
such a festive occasion ... it came this afternoon....”</p>

<p>“<i>Monsieur Gotthold, voilà!</i>” The old man affected to be
quite unmoved as he took the sealed blue paper. “Herr Johann
Buddenbrook, Senior. Personal. A careful man, your
step-brother, Jean! Have I answered his second letter, that
came the other day? And so now he writes me a third.”
The old man’s rosy face grew sterner as he opened the seal
with one finger, unfolded the thin paper, and gave it a smart
rap with the back of his hand as he turned about to catch
the light from the candles. The very handwriting of this
letter seemed to express revolt and disloyalty. All the Buddenbrooks
wrote a fine, flowing hand; but these tall straight
letters were full of heavy strokes, and many of the words were
hastily underlined.</p>

<p>The Consul had drawn back a little to where the row of
chairs stood against the wall; he did not sit down, as his
father did not; but he grasped one of the high chair-backs
nervously and watched the old man while he read, his lips
moving rapidly, his brows drawn together, and his head on
one side.</p>

<div class="blockquot">

<p><span class="smcap">Father</span>,</p>

<p>I am probably mistaken in entertaining any further hope
of your sense of justice or any appreciation of my feelings
at receiving no reply from my second pressing letter concerning
the matter in question. I do not comment again
on the character of the reply I received to my first one.
I feel compelled to say, however, that the way in which you,
by your lamentable obstinacy, are widening the rift between
us, is a sin for which you will one day have to answer grievously
before the judgment seat of God. It is sad enough
that when I followed the dictates of my heart and married
against your wishes, and further wounded your insensate
pride by taking over a shop, you should have repulsed me
so cruelly and remorselessly; but the way in which you now
treat me cries out to Heaven, and you are utterly mistaken
if you imagine that I intend to accept your silence without
a struggle. The purchase price of your newly acquired house
in the Mengstrasse was a hundred thousand marks; and I
am aware that Johann, your business partner and your son
by your second marriage, is living with you as your tenant,
and after your death will become the sole proprietor of both
house and business. With my step-sister in Frankfort, you
have entered into agreements which are no concern of mine.
But what does concern me, your eldest son, is that you carry
your un-Christian spirit so far as to refuse me a penny of
compensation for my share in the house. When you gave
me a hundred thousand marks on my marriage and to set
me up in business, and told me that a similar sum and no
more should be bequeathed me by will, I said nothing, for
I was not at the time sufficiently informed as to the amount
of your fortune. Now I know more: and not regarding myself
as disinherited in principle, I claim as my right the sum
of thirty-three thousand and three hundred and thirty-three
marks current, or a third of the purchase price. I make no
comment on the damnable influences which are responsible for
the treatment I have received. But I protest against them with
my whole sense of justice as a Christian and a business man.
Let me tell you for the last time that, if you cannot bring
yourself to recognize the justice of my claims, I shall no
longer be able to respect you as a Christian, a parent, or a
man of business.</p>

<p class="right"><span class="smcap">Gotthold Buddenbrook.</span></p>
</div>

<p>“You will excuse me for saying that I don’t get much pleasure
out of reading that rigmarole all over again.—<i>Voilà!</i>”
And Johann Buddenbrook tossed the letter to his son, with a
contemptuous gesture. The Consul picked it up as it
fluttered to his feet, and looked at his father with troubled
eyes, while the old man took the long candle-snuffers from
their place by the window and with angry strides crossed the
room to the candelabrum in the corner.</p>

<p>“<i>Assez</i>, I say. <i>N’en parlons plus!</i> To bed with you—<i>en
avant!</i>” He quenched one flame after another under the
little metal cap. There were only two candles left when the
elder turned again to his son, whom he could hardly see at
the far end of the room.</p>

<p>“<i>Eh bien</i>—what are you standing there for? Why don’t
you say something?”</p>

<p>“What shall I say, Father? I am thoroughly taken aback.”</p>

<p>“You are pretty easily taken aback, then,” Johann Buddenbrook
rapped out irritably, though he knew that the reproach
was far from being a just one. His son was in fact often his
superior when it came to a quick decision upon the advantageous
course.</p>

<p>“‘Damnable influences,’” the Consul quoted. “That is
the first line I can make out. Do you know how it makes
me feel, Father? And he reproaches us with ‘unchristian
behaviour!’”</p>

<p>“You’ll let yourself be bluffed by this miserable scribble,
will you?” Johann Buddenbrook strode across to his son,
dragging the extinguisher on its long stick behind him. “‘Unchristian
behaviour!’ Ha! He shows good taste, doesn’t he,
this canting money-grabber? I don’t know what to make of
you young people! Your heads are full of fantastic religious
humbug—practical idealism, the July Monarchy, and what not:
and we old folk are supposed to be wretched cynics. And
then you abuse your poor old Father in the coarsest way
rather than give up a few thousand thaler.... So he deigns
to look down upon me as a business man, does he? Well,
as a business man, I know what <i>faux-frais</i> are!—<i>Faux-frais</i>,”
he repeated, rolling the <i>r</i> in his throat. “I sha’n’t make this
high-falutin scamp of a son any fonder of me by giving him
what he asks for, it seems to me.”</p>

<p>“What can I say, Father? I don’t care to feel that he has
any justification when he talks of ‘influences.’ As an interested
party I don’t like to tell you to stick out, but— It
seems to me I’m as good a Christian as Gotthold ... but
still....”</p>

<p>“‘Still’—that is exactly it, Jean, you are right to say ‘still.’
What is the real state of the case? He got infatuated with
his Mademoiselle Stüwing and wouldn’t listen to reason; he
made scene after scene, and finally he married her, after I
had absolutely refused to give my consent. Then I wrote to
him: ‘<i>Mon très cher fils</i>: you are marrying our shop—very
well, that’s an end of it. We cease to be on friendly terms
from now on. I won’t cut you off, or do anything melodramatic.
I am sending you a hundred thousand marks as a
wedding present, and I’ll leave you another hundred thousand
in my will. But that is absolutely all you’ll get, not
another shilling!’ That shut his mouth.—What have our
arrangements got to do with him? Suppose you and your
sister do get a bit more, and the house has been bought out
of your share?”</p>

<p>“Father, surely you can understand how painful my position
is! I ought to advise you in the interest of family harmony—but....”
The Consul sighed. Johann Buddenbrook
peered at him, in the dim light, to see what his expression
was. One of the two candles had gone out of itself; the other
was flickering. Every now and then a tall, smiling white
figure seemed to step momentarily out of the tapestry and
then back again.</p>

<p>“Father,” said the Consul softly. “This affair with Gotthold
depresses me.”</p>

<p>“What’s all this sentimentality, Jean? How does it depress
you?”</p>

<p>“We were all so happy here to-day, Father; we had a
glorious celebration, and we felt proud and glad of what we
have accomplished, and of having raised the family and firm
to a position of honour and respect.... But this bitter feud
with my own brother, with your eldest son, is like a hidden
crack in the building we have erected. A family should be
united, Father. It must keep together. ‘A house divided
against itself will fall.’”</p>

<p>“There you are with your milk-and-water stuff, Jean! All
I say is, he’s an insolent young puppy.”</p>

<p>A pause ensued. The last candle burned lower and lower.</p>

<p>“What are you doing, Jean?” asked Johann Buddenbrook.
“I can’t see you.”</p>

<p>The Consul said shortly, “I’m calculating.” He was standing
erect, and the expression in his eyes had changed. They
had looked dreamy all the evening; but now they stared into
the candle-flame with a cold sharp gaze. “Either you give
thirty-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-three marks
to Gotthold, and fifteen thousand to the family in Frankfort—that
makes forty-eight thousand, three hundred and thirty-five
in all—or, you give nothing to Gotthold, and twenty-five thousand
to the family in Frankfort. That means a gain of twenty-three
thousand, three hundred and thirty-five for the firm.
But there is more to it than that. If you give Gotthold a
compensation for the house, you’ve started the ball rolling.
He is likely to demand equal shares with my sister and me
after your death, which would mean a loss of hundreds of
thousands to the firm. The firm could not face it, and I, as
sole head, could not face it either.” He made a vigorous gesture
and drew himself more erect than before. “No, Papa,”
he said, and his tone bespoke finality, “I must advise you not
to give in.”</p>

<p>“Bravo!” cried the old man. “There’s an end of it! <i>N’en
parlons plus! En avant!</i> Let’s get to bed.”</p>

<p>And he extinguished the last candle. They groped through
the pitch-dark hall, and at the foot of the stairs they stopped
and shook hands.</p>

<p>“Good night, Jean. And cheer up. These little worries
aren’t anything. See you at breakfast!”</p>

<p>The Consul went up to his rooms, and the old man felt
his way along the baluster and down to the entresol. Soon
the rambling old house lay wrapped in darkness and silence.
Hopes, fears, and ambitions all slumbered, while the rain fell
and the autumn wind whistled around gables and street corners.</p>

<p></p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">PART TWO</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>


<p>It was mid-April, two and a half years later. The spring
was more advanced than usual, and with the spring had come
to the Buddenbrook family a joy that made old Johann sing
about the house and moved his son to the depths of his heart.</p>

<p>The Consul sat at the big roll-top writing-desk in the window
of the breakfast-room, at nine o’clock one Sunday morning.
He had before him a stout leather portfolio stuffed with
papers, from among which he had drawn a gilt-edged notebook
with an embossed cover, and was busily writing in it
in his small, thin, flowing script. His hand hurried over
the paper, never pausing except to dip his quill in the ink.</p>

<p>Both the windows were open, and the spring breeze wafted
delicate odours into the room, lifting the curtains gently.
The garden was full of young buds and bathed in tender sunshine;
a pair of birds called and answered each other pertly.
The sunshine was strong, too, on the white linen of the breakfast-table
and the gilt-borders of the old china.</p>

<p>The folding doors into the bedroom were open, and the
voice of old Johann could be heard inside, singing softly to
a quaint and ancient tune:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="verse">A kind papa, a worthy man,</div>
<div class="verse">He rocks the baby in the cradle,</div>
<div class="verse">He feeds the children sugar-plums</div>
<div class="verse">And stirs the porridge with a ladle.</div>
</div></div>

<p>He sat beside the little green-curtained cradle, close to the
Frau Consul’s lofty bed, and rocked it softly with one hand.
Madame Antoinette, in a white lace cap and an apron over
her striped frock, was busy with flannel and linen at the
table. The old couple had given up their bedroom to the
Frau Consul for the time being, to make things easier for the
servants, and were sleeping in the unused room in the entresol.</p>

<p>Consul Buddenbrook gave scarcely a glance at the adjoining
room, so absorbed was he in his work. His face wore
an expression of earnest, almost suffering piety, his mouth
slightly open, the chin a little dropped; his eyes filled from
time to time. He wrote:</p>

<p>“To-day, April 14, 1838, at six o’clock in the morning, my
dear wife, Elizabeth Buddenbrook, born Kröger, was, by God’s
gracious help, happily delivered of a daughter, who will receive
the name of Clara in Holy Baptism. Yea, the Lord
hath holpen mightily; for according to Doctor Grabow, the
birth was somewhat premature, and her condition not of the
best. She suffered great pain. Oh, Lord God of Sabaoth,
where is there any other God save Thee? who helpest us in all
our times of need and danger, and teachest us to know Thy will
aright, that we may fear Thee and obey Thy commandments!
O Lord, lead us and guide us all, so long as we live upon this
earth....” The pen hurried glibly over the paper, with
here and there a commercial flourish, talking with God in
every line. Two pages further on: “I have taken out,” it
said, “an insurance policy for my youngest daughter, of one
hundred and fifty thaler current. Lead her, O Lord, in Thy
ways, give her a pure heart, O God, that she may one day
enter into the mansions of eternal peace. For inasmuch as
our weak human hearts are prone to forget Thy priceless gift
of the sweet, blessed Jesus....” And so on for three pages.
Then he wrote “Amen.” But still the faint scratching sound
of the pen went on, over several more pages. It wrote of
the precious spring that refreshes the tired wanderer, of the
Saviour’s holy wounds gushing blood, of the broad way and
the narrow way, and the glory of the Eternal God. It is true
that after a while the Consul began to feel that he had written
enough; that he might let well enough alone, and go in to
see his wife, or out to the counting-house. Oh, fie, fie! Did
one so soon weary of communion with his Lord and Saviour?
Was it not robbing his God to scant Him of this service?
No, he would go on, as a chastisement for these unholy impulses.
He cited whole pages of Scripture, he prayed for
his parents, his wife, his children, and himself, he prayed even
for his brother Gotthold. And then, with a last quotation
and three final “Amens,” he strewed sand on the paper and
leaned back with a sigh of relief.</p>

<p>He crossed one leg over the other and slowly turned the
pages of the notebook, reading dates and entries here and
there, written in his own hand, and thanking the Lord afresh
as he saw how in every time of need and danger He had
stretched out His hand to aid. Once he had lain so ill of
small-pox that his life had been despaired of—yet it had been
saved. And once, when he was a boy, a beer-vat had fallen
on him. A large quantity of beer was being brewed for a
wedding, in the old days when the brewing was done at
home; and a vat had fallen over, pinning the boy beneath
it. It had taken six people to lift it up again, and his head
had been crushed so that the blood ran down in streams. He
was carried into a shop, and, as he still breathed, the doctor
and the surgeon were sent for. They told the father to prepare
for the worst and to bow to the will of God. But the
Almighty had blessed the work of healing, and the boy was
saved and restored to health. The Consul dwelt a while
upon this account, re-living the accident in his mind. Then
he took his pen again and wrote after his last “Amen”:
“Yea, O God, I will eternally praise Thee!”</p>

<p>Another time, his life had been saved from danger by water,
when he had gone to Bergen, as a young man. The account
read:</p>

<p>“At high water, when the freight boats of the Northern
Line are in, we have great difficulty getting through the press
to our landing. I was standing on the edge of the scow, with
my feet on the thole-pins, leaning my back against the sailboat,
trying to get the scow nearer in, when, as luck would have
it, the oak thole-pins broke, and I went head over heels into
the water. The first time I came up, nobody was near enough
to get hold of me; the second time, the scow went over my
head. There were plenty of people there anxious to save me,
but they had to keep the sailboat and the scow off, so that
I should not come up under them; and all their shoving
would probably have been in vain if a rope had not suddenly
broken on one of the sailboats belonging to the Line,
so that she swung further out; and this, by the grace of God,
gave me room enough to come up in free water. It was only
the top of my head, with the hair, that they saw; but it was
enough, for they were all lying on their stomachs with their
heads sticking out over the scow, and the man at the bow
grabbed me by the hair, and I got hold of his arm. He was
in an unsafe position himself and could not hold me, but he
gave a yell, and they all took hold of him around the waist
and pulled. I hung on, though he bit me to make me let go.
So they got me in at last.” There followed a long prayer
of thanksgiving, which the Consul re-read with tear-wet eyes.</p>

<p>On another page he had said: “I could write much more,
were I minded to reveal the passions of my youth....”
The Consul passed over this, and began to read here and
there from the period of his marriage and the birth of his
first child. The union, to be frank, could hardly be called
a love-match. His father had tapped him on the shoulder
and pointed out to him the daughter of the wealthy Kröger,
who could bring the firm a splendid marriage portion. He
had accepted the situation with alacrity; and from the first
moment had honoured his wife as the mate entrusted to him
by God.</p>

<p>After all, his father’s second marriage had been of much
the same kind.</p>

<p class="center">“‘A kind Papa, a worthy man.’”</p>

<p>He could still hear old Johann softly humming in the bedroom.
What a pity he had so little taste for those old records!
He stood with both feet firmly planted in the present, and
concerned himself seldom with the past of his family. Yet
in times gone by he too had made a few entries in the gilt-edged
book. The Consul turned to those pages, written in
a florid hand on rather coarse paper that was already yellowing
with age. They were chiefly about his first marriage.
Ah, Johann Buddenbrook must have adored his first wife, the
daughter of a Bremen merchant! The one brief year it had
been granted him to live with her was the happiest of his
life—“<i>l’année la plus heureuse de ma vie</i>,” he had written
there. The words were underlined with a wavy line, for all
the world, even Madame Antoinette, to see.</p>

<p>Then Gotthold had come, and Josephine had died. And
here some strange things had been written on the rough paper.
Johann Buddenbrook must have openly and bitterly hated
his child, even when, while still in the womb, it had caused
its mother to faint and agonize under the lusty burden. It
was born strong and active, while Josephine buried her bloodless
face deeper in the pillows and passed away. Johann
never forgave the ruthless intruder. He grew up vigorous
and pushing, and Johann thought of him as his mother’s
murderer. This was, to the Consul’s mind, incomprehensible.
She had died, he thought, fulfilling the holy duty of a woman:
“the love I bore to her would have passed over in all its
tenderness to her child,” he said to himself. It had not been
so. Later the father married again, his bride being Antoinette
Duchamps, the daughter of a rich and much-esteemed Hamburg
family, and the two had dwelt together with mutual
respect and deference.</p>

<p>The Consul went on turning over the pages. There at the
end were written the small histories of his own children:
how Tom had had the measles, and Antonie jaundice, and
Christian chicken-pox. There were accounts of various journeys
he had taken with his wife, to Paris, Switzerland,
Marienbad. Then the Consul turned back to the front of
the book, to some pages written in bluish ink, in a hand full
of flourishes, on paper that was like parchment, but tattered
and spotted with age. Here his grandfather Johann had set
down the genealogy of the main branch of the Buddenbrooks.
At the end of the sixteenth century, the first Buddenbrook of
whom they had knowledge lived in Parchim, and his son had
been a Senator of Grabau. Another Buddenbrook, a tailor
by trade, and “very well-to-do” (this was underlined) had
married in Rostock and begotten an extraordinary number
of children, who lived or died, as the case might be. And
again, another, this time a Johann, had lived in Rostock as a
merchant, from whom the Consul’s grandfather had descended,
who had left Rostock to settle himself in this very town, and
was the founder of the present grain business. There was
much about him set down in detail: when he had had the
purples, and when genuine small-pox; when he had fallen out
of the malt-kiln and been miraculously saved, when he might
have fallen against the beams and been crushed; how he had
had fever and been delirious—all these events were meticulously
described. He had also written down wise admonitions
for the benefit of his descendants, like the following, which was
carefully painted and framed, in a tall Gothic script set off
with a border: “My son, attend with zeal to thy business
by day; but do none that hinders thee from thy sleep by
night.” He had also stated that his old Wittenberg Bible was
to descend to his eldest son, and thence from first-born to
first-born in each generation.</p>

<p>Consul Buddenbrook reached for the old leather portfolio
and took out the remaining documents. There were letters, on
torn and yellow paper, written by anxious mothers to their
sons abroad—which the sons had docketed: “Received and
contents duly noted.” There were citizens’ papers, with the
seal and crest of the free Hansa town; insurance policies;
letters inviting this or that Buddenbrook to become god-father
for a colleague’s child; congratulatory epistles and occasional
poems. Sons travelling for the firm to Stockholm or Amsterdam
had written back, to the parent or partner at home,
letters in which business was touchingly mingled with inquiries
after wife and child. There was a separate diary of the
Consul’s journey through England and Brabant; the cover
had an engraving of Edinburgh Castle and the Grass-market.
Lastly, there were Gotthold’s late angry letters to his father—painful
documents, to offset which was the poem written
by Jean Jacques Hoffstede to celebrate the house-warming.</p>

<p>A faint, rapid chime came from above the secretary, where
there hung a dull-looking painting of an old market square,
with a church-tower that possessed a real clock of its own.
It was now striking the hour, in authentic if tiny tones. The
Consul closed the portfolio and stowed it away carefully in
a drawer at the back of the desk. Then he went into the
bed-chamber.</p>

<p>Here the walls and the high old bed were hung with dark-flowered
chintz, and there was in the air a feeling of repose,
of convalescence—of calm after an anxious and painful ordeal.
A mingled odour of cologne and drugs hung in the
mild, dim-lighted atmosphere. The old pair bent over the
cradle side by side and watched the slumbering child; and
the Consul’s wife lay pale and happy, in an exquisite lace
jacket, her hair carefully dressed. As she put out her hand
to her husband, her gold bracelets tinkled slightly. She
had a characteristic way of stretching out her hand with
the palm upward, in a sweeping gesture that gave it added
graciousness.</p>

<p>“Well, Betsy, how are you?”</p>

<p>“Splendid, splendid, my dear Jean.”</p>

<p>He still held her hand as he bent over and looked at the
child, whose rapid little breaths were distinctly audible. For
a moment he inhaled the tender warmth and the indescribable
odour of well-being and cherishing care that came up from
the cradle. Then he kissed the little creature on the brow
and said softly: “God bless you!” He noticed how like to
a bird’s claws were the tiny yellow, crumpled fingers.</p>

<p>“She eats splendidly,” Madame Antoinette said. “See how
she has gained.”</p>

<p>“I believe, on my soul, she looks like Netta,” old Johann
said, beaming with pride and pleasure. “See what coal-black
eyes she has!”</p>

<p>The old lady waved him away. “How can anybody tell
who she looks like yet?” she said. “Are you going to church,
Jean?”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is ten o’clock now, and high time. I am only
waiting for the children.”</p>

<p>The children were already making an unseemly noise on the
stairs, and Clothilde could be heard telling them to hush.
They came in in their fur tippets—for it would still be
wintry in St. Mary’s—trying to be soft and gentle in the sick-room.
They wanted to see the little sister, and then go to
church. Their faces were rosy with excitement. This was
a wonderful red-letter day, for the stork had brought not only
the baby sister, but all sorts of presents as well. How tremendously
strong the stork must be, to carry all that! There
was a new seal-skin school-bag for Tom, a big doll for Antonie,
that had real hair—imagine that!—for Christian a complete
toy theatre, with the Sultan, Death, and the Devil; and a
book with pictures for demure Clothilde, who accepted it
with thanks, but was more interested in the bag of sweeties
that fell to her lot as well.</p>

<p>They kissed their mother, and were allowed a peep under
the green curtains of the baby’s bed. Then off they went
with their father, who had put on his fur coat and taken the
hymn book. They were followed by the piercing cry of the
new member of the family, who had just waked up.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>


<p><span class="smcap">Early</span> in the summer, sometimes as early as May or June,
Tony Buddenbrook always went on a visit to her grandparents,
who lived outside the Castle Gate. This was a great
pleasure.</p>

<p>For life was delightful out there in the country, in the
luxurious villa with its many outbuildings, servants’ quarters
and stables, and its great parterres, orchards, and kitchen-gardens,
which ran steeply down to the river Trave. The
Krögers lived in the grand style; there was a difference between
their brilliant establishment and the solid, somewhat
heavy comfort of the paternal home, which was obvious at
a glance, and which impressed very much the young Demoiselle
Buddenbrook.</p>

<p>Here there was no thought of duties in house or kitchen.
In the Mengstrasse, though her Mother and Grandfather did
not seem to think it important, her Father and her Grandmother
were always telling her to remember her dusting, and
holding up Clothilde as an example. The old feudal feeling
of her Mother’s side of the family came out strongly in the
little maid: one could see how she issued her orders to the
footman or the abigail—and to her Grandmother’s servants
and her Grandfather’s coachman as well.</p>

<p>Say what you will, it is pleasant to awake every morning
in a large, gaily tapestried bed-chamber, and with one’s first
movements to feel the soft satin of the coverlet under one’s
hand; to take early breakfast in the balcony room, with the
sweet fresh air coming up from the garden through the open
glass door; to drink, instead of coffee, a cup of chocolate
handed one on a tray—yes, proper birthday chocolate, with
a thick slice of fresh cup-cake! True, she had to eat her
breakfast alone, except on Sundays, for her grandparents
never came down until long after she had gone to school.
When she had munched her cake and drunk her chocolate,
she would snatch up her satchel and trip down the terrace
and through the well-kept front garden.</p>

<p>She was very dainty, this little Tony Buddenbrook. Under
her straw hat curled a wealth of blonde hair, slowly darkening
with the years. Lively grey-blue eyes and a pouting
upper lip gave her fresh face a roguish look, borne out by the
poise of her graceful little figure; even the slender legs, in
their immaculate white stockings, trotted along over the ground
with an unmistakable air of ease and assurance. People
knew and greeted the young daughter of Consul Buddenbrook
as she came out of the garden gate and up the chestnut-bordered
avenue. Perhaps an old market-woman, driving her
little cart in from the village, would nod her head in its big
flat straw hat with its light-green ribbons, and call out
“Mornin’, little missy!” Or Matthiesen the porter, in his wide
knee-breeches, white hose, and buckled shoes, would respectfully
take off his hat as she passed.</p>

<p>Tony always waited for her neighbour, little Julie Hagenström;
the two children went to school together. Julie was a
high-shouldered child, with large, staring black eyes, who
lived close by in a vine-covered house. Her people had not
been long in the neighbourhood. The father, Herr Hagenström,
had married a wife from Hamburg, with thick, heavy
black hair and larger diamonds in her ears than any one had
ever seen before. Her name was Semlinger. Hagenström
was partner in the export firm of Strunck and Hagenström.
He showed great zeal and ambition in municipal affairs, and
was always acting on boards and committees and administrative
bodies. But he was not very popular. His marriage
had rather affronted the rigid traditions of the older families,
like the Möllendorpfs, Langhals, and Buddenbrooks; and,
for another thing, he seemed to enjoy thwarting their ideas
at every turn—he would go to work in an underhand way to
oppose their interests, in order to show his own superior foresight
and energy. “Heinrich Hagenström makes trouble the
whole time,” the Consul would say. “He seems to take a personal
pleasure in thwarting me. To-day he made a scene at
the sitting of the Central Paupers’ Deputation; and a few days
ago in the Finance Department....” “The old skunk!”
Johann Buddenbrook interjected. Another time, father and
son sat down to table angry and depressed. What was the
matter? Oh, nothing. They had lost a big consignment
of rye for Holland: Strunck and Hagenström had snapped
it up under their noses. He was a fox, Heinrich Hagenström.</p>

<p>Tony had often heard such remarks, and she was not too
well disposed toward Julie Hagenström; the two children
walked together because they were neighbours, but usually
they quarrelled.</p>

<p>“My Father owns a thousand thalers,” said Julchen. She
thought she was uttering the most terrible falsehood. “How
much does yours?”</p>

<p>Tony was speechless with envy and humiliation. Then she
said, with a quiet, off-hand manner: “My chocolate tasted
delicious this morning. What do you have for breakfast,
Julie?”</p>

<p>“Before I forget it,” Julie would rejoin, “would you like
one of my apples? Well, I won’t give you any!” She
pursed up her lips, and her black eyes watered with satisfaction.</p>

<p>Sometimes Julie’s brother Hermann went to school at the
same time with the two girls. There was another brother
too, named Moritz, but he was sickly and did his lessons
at home. Hermann was fair-haired and snub-nosed. He
breathed through his mouth and was always smacking his
lips.</p>

<p>“Stuff and nonsense!” he would say. “Papa has a lot more
than a thousand thaler.” He interested Tony because of the
luncheon he took to school: not bread, but a soft sort of
lemon bun with currants in it, and sausage or smoked goose
between. It seemed to be his favourite luncheon. Tony had
never seen anything like it before. Lemon bun, with smoked
goose—it must be wonderful! He let her look into his box,
and she asked if she might have some. Hermann said: “Not
to-day, Tony, because I can’t spare any. But to-morrow I’ll
bring another piece for you, if you’ll give me something.”</p>

<p>Next morning, Tony came out into the avenue, but there
was no Julie. She waited five minutes, but there was no
sign. Another minute—there came Hermann alone, swinging
his lunch-box by the strap and smacking his lips.</p>

<p>“Now,” he said, “here’s a bun, with some goose between—all
lean; there’s not a bit of fat to it. What will you give
me for it?”</p>

<p>“A shilling?” suggested Tony. They were standing in the
middle of the avenue.</p>

<p>“A shilling?” repeated Hermann. Then he gave a gulp
and said, “No, I want something else.”</p>

<p>“What?” demanded Tony; for she was prepared to pay a
good price for the dainty.</p>

<p>“A kiss!” shouted Hermann Hagenström. He flung his
arms around Tony, and began kissing at random, never once
touching her face, for she flung her head back with surprising
agility, pushed him back with her left hand—it was holding
her satchel—against his breast, while with her right hand
she dealt him three or four blows in the face with all her
strength. He stumbled backward; but at that moment sister
Julie appeared from behind a tree, like a little black demon,
and, falling upon Tony, tore off her hat and scratched her
cheeks unmercifully. After this affair, naturally, the friendship
was about at an end.</p>

<p>It was hardly out of shyness that Tony had refused the
kiss. She was on the whole a forward damsel, and had
given the Consul no little disquiet with her tomboy ways.
She had a good little head, and did as well in the school as
one could desire; but her conduct in other ways was far from
satisfactory. Things even went so far that one day the school-mistress,
a certain Fräulein Agathe Vermehren, felt obliged
to call upon the Frau Consul, and, flushed with embarrassment,
to suggest with all due politeness that the child should
receive a paternal admonition. It seemed that Tony, despite
frequent correction, had been guilty, not for the first time,
of creating a disturbance in the street!</p>

<p>There was, of course, no harm in the fact that the child
knew everybody in town. The Consul quite approved of
this, and argued that it displayed love of one’s neighbour, a
sense of human fellowship, and a lack of snobbishness. So
Tony, on her way through the streets, chattered with all and
sundry. She and Tom would clamber about in the granaries
on the water-side, among the piles of oats and wheat, prattling
to the labourers and the clerks in the dark little ground-floor
offices; they would even help haul up the sacks of grain.
She knew the butchers with their trays and aprons, when she
met them in Broad Street; she accosted the dairy women when
they came in from the country, and made them take her a
little way in their carts. She knew the grey-bearded craftsmen
who sat in the narrow goldsmiths’ shops built into the
arcades in the market square; and she knew the fish-wives, the
fruit- and vegetable-women, and the porters that stood on the
street corners chewing their tobacco.</p>

<p>So far, this was very well. But it was not all.</p>

<p>There was a pale, beardless man, of no particular age, who
was often seen wandering up and down Broad Street with a
wistful smile on his face. This man was so nervous that he
jumped every time he heard a sudden noise behind him; and
Tony delighted in making him jump every time she set eyes
on him. Then there was an odd, tiny little woman with a
large head, who put up a huge tattered umbrella at every
sign of a storm. Tony would harass this poor soul with cries
of “Mushroom!” whenever she had the chance. Moreover,
she and two or three more of her ilk would go to the door of
a tiny house in an alley off John Street, where there lived an
old woman who did a tiny trade in worsted dolls; they would
ring the bell and, when the old dame appeared, inquire with
deceptive courtesy, if Herr and Frau Spittoon were at home—and
then run away screaming with laughter. All these ragamuffinly
tricks Tony Buddenbrook was guilty of—indeed, she
seemed to perform them with the best conscience in the world.
If one of her victims threatened her, she would step back a
pace or two, toss her pretty head, pout with her pretty lip,
and say “Pooh!” in a half mocking, half angry tone which
meant: “Try it if you like. I am Consul Buddenbrook’s
daughter, if you don’t know!”</p>

<p>Thus she went about in the town like a little queen; and
like a queen, she was kind or cruel to her subjects, as the
whim seized her.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Jean Jacques Hoffstede’s</span> verdict on the two sons of Consul
Buddenbrook undoubtedly hit the mark.</p>

<p>Thomas had been marked from the cradle as a merchant
and future member of the firm. He was on the modern side
of the old school which the boys attended; an able, quick-witted,
intelligent lad, always ready to laugh when his brother
Christian mimicked the masters, which he did with uncanny
facility. Christian, on the classical side, was not less gifted
than Tom, but he was less serious. His special and particular
joy in life was the imitation, in speech and manner, of a certain
worthy Marcellus Stengel, who taught drawing, singing,
and some other of the lighter branches.</p>

<p>This Herr Marcellus Stengel always had a round half-dozen
beautifully sharpened pencils sticking out of his pocket. He
wore a red wig and a light-brown coat that reached nearly
down to his ankles; also a choker collar that came up almost
to his temples. He was quite a wit, and loved to play with
verbal distinctions, as: “You were to make a line, my child,
and what have you made? You have made a dash!” In
singing-class, his favourite lesson was “The Forest Green.”
When they sang this, some of the pupils would go outside in
the corridor; and then, when the chorus rose inside: “We
ramble so gaily through field and wood,” those outside would
repeat the last word very softly, as an echo. Once Christian
Buddenbrook, his cousin Jürgen Kröger, and his chum Andreas
Gieseke, the son of the Fire Commissioner, were deputed
as echo; but when the moment came, they threw the
coal-scuttle downstairs instead, and were kept in after school
by Herr Stengel in consequence. But alas, by that time Herr
Stengel had forgotten their crime. He bade his housekeeper
give them each a cup of coffee, and then dismissed them.</p>

<p>In truth, they were all admirable scholars, the masters who
taught in the cloisters of the old school—once a monastic
foundation—under the guidance of a kindly, snuff-taking old
head. They were, to a man, well-meaning and sweet-humoured;
and they were one in the belief that knowledge
and good cheer are not mutually exclusive. The Latin
classes in the middle forms were heard by a former preacher,
one Pastor Shepherd, a tall man with brown whiskers and a
twinkling eye, who joyed extremely in the happy coincidence
of his name and calling, and missed no chance of having the
boys translate the word <i>pastor</i>. His favourite expression was
“boundlessly limited”; but it was never quite clear whether
this was actually meant for a joke or not! When he wanted
to dumbfound his pupils altogether, he would draw in his
lips and blow them quickly out again, with a noise like the
popping of a champagne cork. He would go up and down
with long strides in his class-room, prophesying to one boy or
another, with great vividness, the course which his life would
take. He did this avowedly with the purpose of stimulating
their imaginations; and then he would set to work seriously
on the business in hand, which was to repeat certain
verses on the rules of gender and difficult constructions. He
had composed these verses himself, with no little skill, and
took much pride in declaiming them, with great attention
to rhyme and rhythm.</p>

<p>Thus passed Tom’s and Christian’s boyhood, with no great
events to mark its course. There was sunshine in the Buddenbrook
family, and in the office everything went famously.
Only now and again there would be a sudden storm, a trifling
mishap, like the following:</p>

<p>Herr Stuht the tailor had made a new suit for each of the
Buddenbrook lads. Herr Stuht lived in Bell-Founders’ Street.
He was a master tailor, and his wife bought and sold old
clothes, and thus moved in the best circles of society. Herr
Stuht himself had an enormous belly, which hung down over
his legs, wrapped in a flannel shirt. The suits he made for the
young Masters Buddenbrook were at the combined cost of
seventy marks; but at the boys’ request he had consented to
put them down in the bill at eighty marks and to hand them
the difference. It was just a little arrangement among themselves—not
very honourable, indeed, but then, not very uncommon
either. However, fate was unkind, and the bargain
came to light. Herr Stuht was sent for to the Consul’s office,
whither he came, with a black coat over his woollen shirt, and
stood there while the Consul subjected Tom and Christian
to a severe cross-examination. His head was bowed and his
legs far apart, his manner vastly respectful. He tried to
smooth things over as much as he could for the young gentlemen,
and said that what was done was done, and he would be
satisfied with the seventy marks. But the Consul was greatly
incensed by the trick. He gave it long and serious consideration;
yet finally ended by increasing the lads’ pocket-money—for
was it not written: “Lead us not into temptation?”</p>

<p>It seemed probable that more might be expected from
Thomas Buddenbrook than from his brother Christian. He
was even-tempered, and his high spirits never crossed the
bounds of discretion. Christian, on the other hand, was inclined
to be moody: guilty at times of the most extravagant
silliness, at others he would be seized by a whim which could
terrify the rest of them in the most astonishing way.</p>

<p>The family are at table eating dessert and conversing pleasantly
the while. Suddenly Christian turns pale and puts
back on his plate the peach into which he has just bitten. His
round, deep-set eyes, above the too-large nose, have opened
wider.</p>

<p>“I will never eat another peach,” he says.</p>

<p>“Why not, Christian? What nonsense! What’s the matter?”</p>

<p>“Suppose I accidentally—suppose I swallowed the stone,
and it stuck in my throat, so I couldn’t breathe, and I jumped
up, strangling horribly—and all of you jump up— Ugh...!”
and he suddenly gives a short groan, full of
horror and affright, starts up in his chair, and acts as if he
were trying to escape.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul and Ida Jungmann actually do jump up.</p>

<p>“Heavens, Christian!—you haven’t swallowed it, have you?”
For his whole appearance suggests that he has.</p>

<p>“No,” says Christian slowly. “No”—he is gradually quieting
down—“I only mean, suppose I actually <i>had</i> swallowed
it!”</p>

<p>The Consul has been pale with fright, but he recovers and
begins to scold. Old Johann bangs his fist on the table and
forbids any more of these idiotic practical jokes. But Christian,
for a long, long time, eats no more peaches.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">It</span> was not simply the weakness of age that made Madame
Antoinette Buddenbrook take to her lofty bed in the bed-chamber
of the entresol, one cold January day after they had
dwelt some six years in Meng Street. The old lady had remained
hale and active, and carried her head, with its clustering
white side-curls, proudly erect to the very last. She had
gone with her husband and children to most of the large dinners
given in the town, and presided no whit less elegantly
than her daughter-in-law when the Buddenbrooks themselves
entertained. But one day an indefinable malady had suddenly
made itself felt—at first in the form of a slight intestinal
catarrh, for which Dr. Grabow prescribed a mild diet of
pigeon and French bread. This had been followed by colic
and vomiting, which reduced her strength so rapidly as to
bring about an alarming decline.</p>

<p>Dr. Grabow held hurried speech with the Consul, outside
on the landing, and another doctor was called in consultation—a
stout, black-bearded, gloomy-looking man who began
going in and out with Dr. Grabow. And now the whole atmosphere
of the house changed. They went about on their
tip-toes and spoke in whispers. The wagons were no longer
allowed to roll through the great entry-way below. They
looked in each others’ eyes and saw there something strange.
It was the idea of death that had entered, and was holding
silent sway in the spacious rooms.</p>

<p>But there was no idle watching, for visitors came: old
Senator Duchamps, the dying woman’s brother, from Hamburg,
with his daughter; and a few days later, the Consul’s
sister from Frankfort and her husband, who was a banker.
The illness lasted fourteen or fifteen days, during which the
guests lived in the house, and Ida Jungmann had her hands
full attending to the bedrooms and providing heavy breakfasts,
with shrimps and port wine. Much roasting and baking
went on in the kitchen.</p>

<p>Upstairs, Johann Buddenbrook sat by the sick-bed, his old
Netta’s limp hand in his, and stared into space with his brows
knitted and his lower lip hanging. A clock hung on the
wall and ticked dully, with long pauses between; not so long,
however, as the pauses between the dying woman’s fluttering
breaths. A black-robed sister of mercy busied herself about
the beef-tea which they still sought to make the patient take.
Now and then some member of the family would appear at
the door and disappear again.</p>

<p>Perhaps the old man was thinking how he had sat at the
death-bed of his first wife, forty-six years before. Perhaps he
recalled his frenzy of despair and contrasted it with the gentle
melancholy which he felt now, as an old man, gazing into
the face of his old wife—a face so changed, so listless, so
void of expression. She had never given him either a great
joy or a great sorrow; but she had decorously played her
part beside him for many a long year—and now her life was
ebbing away.</p>

<p>He was not thinking a great deal. He was only looking
with fixed gaze back into his own past life and at life in general.
It all seemed to him now quite strange and far away,
and he shook his head a little. That empty noise and bustle,
in the midst of which he had once stood, had flowed away
imperceptibly and left him standing there, listening in wonder
to sounds that died upon his ear. “Strange, strange,” he
murmured.</p>

<p>Madame Buddenbrook breathed her last brief, effortless
sigh; and they prayed by her side in the dining-room, where
the service was held; and the bearers lifted the flower-covered
coffin to carry it away. But old Johann did not weep. He
only gave the same gentle, bewildered head-shake, and said,
with the same half-smiling look: “Strange, strange!” It became
his most frequent expression. Plainly, the time for old
Johann too was near at hand.</p>

<p>He would sit silent and absent in the family circle; sometimes
with little Clara on his knee, to whom he would sing
one of his droll catches, like</p>

<p class="center">“The omnibus drives through the town”</p>

<p>or perhaps</p>

<p class="center">“Look at the blue-fly a-buzzin’ on the wall.”</p>

<p>But he might suddenly stop in the middle, like one aroused
out of a train of thought, put the child down on the floor,
and move away, with his little head-shake and murmur
“Strange, strange!” One day he said: “Jean—it’s about
time, eh?”</p>

<p>It was soon afterward that neatly printed notices signed by
father and son were sent about through the town, in which
Johann Buddenbrook senior respectfully begged leave to announce
that his increasing years obliged him to give up his
former business activities, and that in consequence the firm
of Johann Buddenbrook, founded by his late father anno 1768,
would as from that day be transferred, with its assets and liabilities,
to his son and former partner Johann Buddenbrook
as sole proprietor; for whom he solicited a continuance of
the confidence so widely bestowed upon him. Signed, with
deep respect, Johann Buddenbrook—who would from now on
cease to append his signature to business papers.</p>

<p>These announcements were no sooner sent out than the old
man refused to set foot in the office; and his apathy so increased
that it took only the most trifling cold to send him to
bed, one March day two months after the death of his wife.
One night more—then came the hour when the family gathered
round his bed and he spoke to them: first to the Consul:
“Good luck, Jean, and keep your courage up!” And then to
Thomas: “Be a help to your Father, Tom!” And to Christian:
“Be something worth while!” Then he was silent,
gazing at them all; and finally, with a last murmured
“Strange!” he turned his face to the wall....</p>

<p>To the very end, he did not speak of Gotthold, and the latter
encountered with silence the Consul’s written summons to
his father’s death-bed. But early the next morning, before
the announcements were sent out, as the Consul was about to
go into the office to attend to some necessary business, Gotthold
Buddenbrook, proprietor of the linen firm of Siegmund
Stüwing and Company, came with rapid steps through the
entry. He was forty-six years old, broad and stocky, and had
thick ash-blond whiskers streaked with grey. His short legs
were cased in baggy trousers of rough checked material. On
the steps he met the Consul, and his eyebrows went up under
the brim of his grey hat.</p>

<p>He did not put out his hand. “Johann,” he said, in a high-pitched,
rather agreeable voice, “how is he?”</p>

<p>“He passed away last night,” the Consul said, with deep
emotion, grasping his brother’s hand, which held an umbrella.
“The best of fathers!”</p>

<p>Gotthold drew down his brows now, so low that the lids
nearly closed. After a silence, he said pointedly: “Nothing
was changed up to the end?”</p>

<p>The Consul let his hand drop and stepped back. His
round, deep-set blue eyes flashed as he answered, “Nothing.”</p>

<p>Gotthold’s eyebrows went up again under his hat, and his
eyes fixed themselves on his brother with an expression of
suspense.</p>

<p>“And what have I to expect from your sense of justice?”
he asked in a lower voice.</p>

<p>It was the Consul’s turn to look away. Then, without lifting
his eyes, he made that downward gesture with his hand
that always betokened decision; and in a quiet voice, but
firmly, he answered:</p>

<p>“In this sad and solemn moment I have offered you my
brotherly hand. But if it is your intention to speak of business
matters, then I can only reply in my capacity as head of
the honourable firm whose sole proprietor I have to-day become.
You can expect from me nothing that runs counter to
the duties I have to-day assumed; all other feelings must be
silent.”</p>

<p>Gotthold went away. But he came to the funeral, among
the host of relatives, friends, business associates, deputies,
clerks, porters, and labourers that filled the house, the stairs,
and the corridors to overflowing and assembled all the hired
coaches in town in a long row all the way down the Mengstrasse.
Gotthold came, to the sincere joy of the Consul. He
even brought his wife, born Stüwing, and his three grown
daughters: Friederike and Henriette, who were too tall and
thin, and Pfiffi, who was eighteen, and too short and fat.</p>

<p>Pastor Kölling of St. Mary’s, a heavy man with a bullet
head and a rough manner of speaking, held the service at
the grave, in the Buddenbrook family burying-ground, outside
the Castle Gate, at the edge of the cemetery grove. He extolled
the godly, temperate life of the deceased and compared
it with that of “gluttons, drunkards, and profligates”—over
which strong language some of the congregation shook their
heads, thinking of the tact and moderation of their old Pastor
Wunderlich, who had lately died. When the service and
the burial were over, and the seventy or eighty hired coaches
began to roll back to town, Gotthold Buddenbrook asked the
Consul’s permission to go with him, that they might speak
together in private. He sat with his brother on the back
seat of the high, ungainly old coach, one short leg crossed
over the other—and, wonderful to relate, he was gentle and
conciliatory. He realized more and more, he said, that the
Consul was bound to act as he was doing; and he was determined
to cherish no bitter memories of his father. He
renounced the claims he had put forward, the more readily
that he had decided to retire from business and live upon his
inheritance and what capital he had left; for he had no joy
of the linen business, and it was going so indifferently that
he could not bring himself to put any more money into
it.... “His spite against our Father brought him no blessing,”
the Consul thought piously. Probably Gotthold thought
so too.</p>

<p>When they got back, he went with his brother up to the
breakfast-room; and as both gentlemen felt rather chilly,
after standing so long in their dress-coats in the early spring
air, they drank a glass of old cognac together. Then Gotthold
exchanged a few courteous words with his sister-in-law,
stroked the children’s heads, and went away. But he appeared
at the next “children’s day,” which took place at the
Krögers’, outside the Castle Gate. And he began to wind up
his business at once.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">It</span> grieved the Consul sorely that the grandfather had not
lived to see the entry of his grandson into the business—an
event which took place at Easter-time of the same year.</p>

<p>Thomas had left school at sixteen. He was grown strong
and sturdy, and his manly clothes made him look still older.
He had been confirmed, and Pastor Kölling, in stentorian
tones, had enjoined upon him to practice the virtues of moderation.
A gold chain, bequeathed him by his grandfather,
now hung about his neck, with the family arms on a medallion
at the end—a rather dismal design, showing on an irregularly
hatched surface a flat stretch of marshy country with one
solitary, leafless willow tree. The old seal ring with the
green stone, once worn, in all probability, by the well-to-do
tailor in Rostock, had descended to the Consul, together with
the great Bible.</p>

<p>Thomas’s likeness to his grandfather was as strong as
Christian’s to his father. The firm round chin was the old
man’s, and the straight, well-chiselled nose. Thomas wore
his hair parted on one side, and it receded in two bays from
his narrow veined temples. His eyelashes were colourless by
contrast, and so were the eyebrows, one of which he had a
habit of lifting expressively. His speech, his movements, even
his laugh, which showed his rather defective teeth, were all
quiet and adequate. He already looked forward seriously
and eagerly to his career.</p>

<p>It was indeed a solemn moment when, after early breakfast,
the Consul led him down into the office and introduced him
to Herr Marcus the confidential clerk, Herr Havermann the
cashier, and the rest of the staff, with all of whom, naturally,
he had long been on the best of terms. For the first time he
sat at his desk, in his own revolving chair, absorbed in copying,
stamping, and arranging papers. In the afternoon his
father took him through the magazines on the Trave, each one
of which had a special name, like the “Linden,” the “Oak,”
the “Lion,” the “Whale.” Tom was thoroughly at home in
every one of them, of course, but now for the first time he
entered them to be formally introduced as a fellow worker.</p>

<p>He entered upon his tasks with devotion, imitating the quiet,
tenacious industry of his father, who was working with his
jaws set, and writing down many a prayer for help in his
private diary. For the Consul had set himself the task of
making good the sums paid out by the firm on the occasion of
his father’s death. It was a conception ... an ideal....
He explained the position quite fully to his wife late one
evening in the landscape-room.</p>

<p>It was half-past eleven, and Mamsell Jungmann and the
children were already asleep in the corridor rooms. No one
slept in the second storey now—it was empty save for an occasional
guest. The Frau Consul sat on the yellow sofa
beside her husband, and he, cigar in mouth, was reading the
financial columns of the local paper. She bent over her
embroidery, moving her lips as she counted a row of stitches
with her needle. Six candles burned in a candelabrum on the
slender sewing-table beside her, and the chandelier was unlighted.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook was nearing the middle forties, and
had visibly altered in the last years. His little round eyes
seemed to have sunk deeper in his head, his cheek-bones and
his large aquiline nose stood out more prominently than ever,
and the ash-blond hair seemed to have been just touched with
a powder-puff where it parted on the temples. The Frau
Consul was at the end of her thirties, but, while never beautiful,
was as brilliant as ever; her dead-white skin, with a
single freckle here and there, had lost none of its splendour,
and the candle-light shone on the rich red-blond hair that
was as wonderfully dressed as ever. Giving her husband a
sidelong glance with her clear blue eyes, she said:</p>

<p>“Jean, I wanted to ask you to consider something: if it
would not perhaps be advisable to engage a man-servant. I
have just been coming to that conclusion. When I think of
my parents—”</p>

<p>The Consul let his paper drop on his knee and took his
cigar out of his mouth. A shrewd look came into his eyes:
here was a question of money to be paid out.</p>

<p>“My dear Betsy,” he said—and he spoke as deliberately
as possible, to gain time to muster his excuses—“do you think
we need a man-servant? Since my parents’ death we have
kept on all three maids, not counting Mamsell Jungmann. It
seems to me—”</p>

<p>“Oh, but the house is so big, Jean. We can hardly get
along as it is. I say to Line, ‘Line, it’s a fearfully long time
since the rooms in the annexe were dusted’; but I don’t like
to drive the girls too hard; they have their work cut out to
keep everything clean and tidy here in the front. And a
man-servant would be so useful for errands and so on. We
could find some honest man from the country, who wouldn’t
expect much.... Oh, before I forget it—Louise Möllendorpf
is letting her Anton go. I’ve seen him serve nicely at table.”</p>

<p>“To tell you the truth,” said the Consul, and shuffled about
a little uneasily, “it is a new idea to me. We aren’t either
entertaining or going out just now—”</p>

<p>“No, but we have visitors very often—for which I am not
responsible, Jean, as you know, though of course I am always
glad to see them. You have a business friend from
somewhere, and you invite him to dinner. Then he has not
taken a room at a hotel, so we ask him to stop the night. A
missionary comes, and stops the week with us. Week after
next, Pastor Mathias is coming from Kannstadt. And the
wages amount to so little—”</p>

<p>“But they mount up, Betsy! We have four people here
in the house—and think of the pay-roll the firm has!”</p>

<p>“So we really can’t afford a man-servant?” the Frau Consul
asked. She smiled as she spoke, and looked at her husband
with her head on one side. “When I think of all the
servants my Father and Mother had—”</p>

<p>“My dear Betsy! Your parents— I really must ask you
if you understand our financial position?”</p>

<p>“No, Jean, I must admit I do not. I’m afraid I have only
a vague idea—”</p>

<p>“Well, I can tell you in a few words,” the Consul said.
He sat up straight on the sofa, with one knee crossed over the
other, puffed at his cigar, knit his brows a little, and marshalled
his figures with wonderful fluency.</p>

<p>“To put it briefly, my Father had, before my sister’s marriage,
a round sum of nine hundred thousand marks net, not
counting, of course, real estate, and the stock and good will of
the firm. Eighty thousand went to Frankfort as dowry, and a
hundred thousand to set Gotthold up in business. That leaves
seven hundred and twenty thousand. The price of this house,
reckoning off what we got for the little one in Alf Street, and
counting all the improvements and new furnishings, came to
a good hundred thousand. That brings it down to six hundred
and twenty thousand. Twenty-five thousand to Frankfort,
as compensation on the house, leaves five hundred and
ninety-five thousand—which is what we should have had at
Father’s death if we hadn’t partly made up for all these expenses
through years, by a profit of some two hundred thousand
marks current. The entire capital amounted to seven
hundred and ninety-five thousand marks, of which another
hundred thousand went to Gotthold, and a few thousand marks
for the minor legacies that Father left to the Holy Ghost Hospital,
the Fund for Tradesmen’s Widows, and so on. That
brings us down to around four hundred and twenty thousand,
or another hundred thousand with your own dowry. There
is the position, in round figures, aside from small fluctuations
in the capital. You see, my dear Betsy, we are not rich. And
while the capital has grown smaller, the running expenses
have not; for the whole business is established on a certain
scale, which it costs about so much to maintain. Have you
followed me?”</p>

<p>The Consul’s wife, her needlework in her lap, nodded
with some hesitation. “Quite so, my dear Jean,” she said,
though she was far from having understood everything, least
of all what these big figures had to do with her engaging a
man-servant.</p>

<p>The Consul puffed at his cigar till it glowed, threw back
his head and blew out the smoke, and then went on:</p>

<p>“You are thinking, of course, that when God calls your dear
parents unto Himself, we shall have a considerable sum to
look forward to—and so we shall. But we must not reckon
too blindly on it. Your Father has had some heavy losses,
due, we all know, to your brother Justus. Justus is certainly
a charming personality, but business is not his strong point,
and he has had bad luck too. According to all accounts he
has had to pay up pretty heavily, and transactions with
bankers make dear money. Your Father has come to the
rescue several times, to prevent a smash. That sort of thing
may happen again—to speak frankly, I am afraid it will.
You will forgive me, Betsy, for my plain speaking, but you
know that the style of living which is so proper and pleasing
in your Father is not at all suitable for a business man. Your
Father has nothing to do with business any more; but Justus—you
know what I mean—he isn’t very careful, is he? His
ideas are too large, he is too impulsive. And your parents
aren’t saving anything. They live a lordly life—as their
circumstances permit them to.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul smiled forbearingly. She well knew her
husband’s opinion of the luxurious Kröger tastes.</p>

<p>“That’s all,” he said, and put his cigar into the ash-receiver.
“As far as I’m concerned, I live in the hope that God will
preserve my powers unimpaired, and that by His gracious
help I may succeed in reëstablishing the firm on its old
basis.... I hope you see the thing more clearly now, Betsy?”</p>

<p>“Quite, quite, my dear Jean,” the Frau Consul hastened to
reply; for she had given up the man-servant, for the evening.
“Shall we go to bed? It is very late—”</p>

<p>A few days later, when the Consul came in to dinner in an
unusually good mood, they decided at the table to engage
the Möllendorpfs’ Anton.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">We</span> shall put Tony into Fräulein Weichbrodt’s boarding-school,”
said the Consul. He said it with such decision that
so it was.</p>

<p>Thomas was applying himself with talent to the business;
Clara was a thriving, lively child; and the appetite of the
good Clothilde must have pleased any heart alive. But Tony
and Christian were hardly so satisfactory. It was not only
that Christian had to stop nearly every afternoon for coffee
with Herr Stengel—though even this became at length too
much for the Frau Consul, and she sent a dainty missive to the
master, summoning him to conference in Meng Street. Herr
Stengel appeared in his Sunday wig and his tallest choker,
bristling with lead-pencils like lance-heads, and they sat on
the sofa in the landscape-room, while Christian hid in the
dining-room and listened. The excellent man set out his
views, with eloquence if some embarrassment: spoke of the
difference between “line” and “dash,” told the tale of “The
Forest Green” and the scuttle of coals, and made use in every
other sentence of the phrase “in consequence.” It probably
seemed to him a circumlocution suitable to the elegant surroundings
in which he found himself. After a while the
Consul came and drove Christian away. He expressed to
Herr Stengel his lively regret that a son of his should give
cause for dissatisfaction. “Oh, Herr Consul, God forbid!
Buddenbrook minor has a wide-awake mind, he is a lively
chap, and in consequence— Just a little <i>too</i> lively, if I
might say so; and in consequence—” The Consul politely
went with him through the hall to the entry, and Herr Stengel
took his leave.... Ah, no, this was far from being the
worst!</p>

<p>The worst, when it became known, was as follows: Young
Christian Buddenbrook had leave one evening to go to the
theatre in company with a friend. The performance was
Schiller’s Wilhelm Tell; and the rôle of Tell’s son Walter was
played by a young lady, a certain Mademoiselle Meyer-de-la-Grange.
Christian’s worst, then, had to do with this young
person. She wore when on the stage, whether it suited her
part or not, a diamond brooch, which was notoriously genuine;
for, as everybody knew, it was the gift of young Consul
Döhlmann—Peter Döhlmann, son of the deceased wholesale
dealer in Wall Street outside Holsten Gate. Consul Peter,
like Justus Kröger, belonged to the group of young men whom
the town called “fast.” His way of life, that is to say, was
rather loose! He had married, and had one child, a little
daughter; but he had long ago quarrelled with his wife,
and he led the life of a bachelor. His father had left
him a considerable inheritance, and he carried on the business,
after a fashion; but people said he was already living on his
capital. He lived mostly at the Club or the Rathskeller,
was often to be met somewhere in the street at four o’clock in
the morning; and made frequent business trips to Hamburg.
Above all, he was a zealous patron of the drama, and took
a strong personal interest in the cast. Mademoiselle Meyer-de-la-Grange
was the latest of a line of young ladies whom he
had, in the past, distinguished by a gift of diamonds.</p>

<p>Well, to arrive at the point, this young lady looked so
charming as Walter Tell, wore her brooch and spoke her lines
with such effect, that Christian felt his heart swell with enthusiasm,
and tears rose to his eyes. He was moved by his
transports to a course that only the very violence of emotion
could pursue. He ran during the entr’acte to a flower-shop
opposite, where, for the sum of one mark eight and a half
shillings, he got at a bargain a bunch of flowers; and then
this fourteen-year-old sprat, with his big nose and his deep-lying
eyes, took his way to the green-room, since nobody
stopped him, and came upon Fräulein Meyer-de-la-Grange,
talking with Consul Peter Döhlmann at her dressing-room
door. Peter Döhlmann nearly fell over with laughing when
he saw Christian with the bouquet. But the new wooer, with
a solemn face, bowed in his best manner before Walter Tell,
handed her the bouquet, and, nodding his head, said in a voice
of well-nigh tearful conviction: “Ah, Fräulein, how <i>beautifully</i>
you act!”</p>

<p>“Well, hang me if it ain’t Krishan Buddenbrook!” Consul
Döhlmann cried out, in his broadest accent. Fräulein
Meyer-de-la-Grange lifted her pretty brows and asked: “The
son of Consul Buddenbrook?” And she stroked the cheek
of her young admirer with all the favour in the world.</p>

<p>Such was the story that Consul Peter Döhlmann told at the
Club that night; it flew about the town like lightning, and
reached the ears of the head master, who asked for an audience
with Consul Buddenbrook. And how did the Father
take this affair? He was, in truth, less angry than overwhelmed.
He sat almost like a broken man, after telling the
Frau Consul the story in the landscape-room.</p>

<p>“And this is our son,” he said. “So is he growing up—”</p>

<p>“But Jean! Good heavens, your Father would have
laughed at it. Tell it to my Father and Mother on Thursday—you
will see how Papa will enjoy it—”</p>

<p>But here the Consul rose up in anger. “Ah, yes, yes! I
am sure he will enjoy it, Betsy. He will be glad to know that
his light blood and impious desires live on, not only in a
rake like Justus, his own son, but also in a grandson of his
as well! Good God, you drive me to say these things!— He
goes to this—person; he spends his pocket-money on
flowers for this—<i>lorette</i>! I don’t say he knows what he is doing—yet.
But the inclination shows itself—it shows itself,
Betsy!”</p>

<p>Ah, yes, this was all very painful indeed. The Consul
was perhaps the more beside himself for the added reason
that Tony’s behaviour, too, had not been of the best. She had
given up, it is true, shouting at the nervous stranger to make
him dance; and she no longer rang the doorbell of the tiny
old woman who sold worsted dolls. But she threw back
her head more pertly than ever, and showed, especially after
the summer visits with her grandparents, a very strong tendency
to vanity and arrogance of spirit.</p>

<p>One day the Consul surprised her and Mamsell Jungmann
reading together. The book was Clauren’s “Mimili”; the
Consul turned over some of the leaves, and then silently
closed it—and it was opened no more. Soon afterward it
came to light that Tony—Antonie Buddenbrook, no less a
person—had been seen walking outside the City wall with
a young student, a friend of her brother. Frau Stuht, she
who moved in the best circles, had seen the pair, and had
remarked at the Möllendorpfs’, whither she had gone to buy
some cast-off clothing, that really Mademoiselle Buddenbrook
was getting to the age where— And Frau Senator Möllendorpf
had lightly repeated the story to the Consul. The
pleasant strolls came to an end. Later it came out that
Fräulein Antonie had made a post-office of the old hollow
tree that stood near the Castle Gate, and not only posted
therein letters addressed to the same student, but received
letters from him as well by that means. When these facts
came to light, they seemed to indicate the need of a more
watchful oversight over the young lady, now fifteen years old;
and she was accordingly, as we have already said, sent to
boarding-school at Fräulein Weichbrodt’s, Number seven,
Millbank.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Therese Weichbrodt</span> was humpbacked. So humpbacked
that she was not much higher than a table. She was forty-one
years old. But as she had never put her faith in outward
seeming, she dressed like an old lady of sixty or seventy.
Upon her padded grey locks rested a cap the green ribbons of
which fell down over shoulders narrow as a child’s. Nothing
like an ornament ever graced her shabby black frock—only
the large oval brooch with her mother’s miniature in it.</p>

<p>Little Miss Weichbrodt had shrewd, sharp brown eyes, a
slightly hooked nose, and thin lips which she could compress
with extraordinary firmness. In her whole insignificant figure,
in her every movement, there indwelt a force which was,
to be sure, somewhat comic, yet exacted respect. And her
mode of speech helped to heighten the effect. She spoke
with brisk, jerky motions of the lower jaw and quick, emphatic
nods. She used no dialect, but enunciated clearly and with
precision, stressing the consonants. Vowel-sounds, however,
she exaggerated so much that she said, for instance, “botter”
instead of “butter”—or even “batter!” Her little dog that
was forever yelping she called Babby instead of Bobby. She
would say to a pupil: “Don-n’t be so stu-upid, child,” and
give two quick knocks on the table with her knuckle. It was
very impressive—no doubt whatever about that! And when
Mlle. Popinet, the Frenchwoman, took too much sugar to her
coffee, Miss Weichbrodt had a way of gazing at the ceiling and
drumming on the cloth with one hand while she said: “Why
not take the who-ole sugar-basin? I would!” It always
made Mlle. Popinet redden furiously.</p>

<p>As a child—heavens, what a tiny child she must have been!—Therese
Weichbrodt had given herself the nickname of
Sesemi, and she still kept it, even letting the best and most
favoured of the day as well as of the boarding-pupils use
it. “Call me Sesemi, child,” she said on the first day to Tony
Buddenbrook, kissing her briefly, with a sound as of a small
explosion, on the forehead. “I like it.” Her elder sister,
however, Madame Kethelsen, was called Nelly.</p>

<p>Madame Kethelsen was about forty-eight years old. She
had been left penniless when her husband died, and now lived
in a little upstairs bedroom in her sister’s house. She dressed
like Sesemi, but by contrast was very tall. She wore woollen
wristlets on her thin wrists. She was not a mistress, and
knew nothing of discipline. A sort of inoffensive and placid
cheerfulness was all her being. When one of the pupils
played a prank, she would laugh so heartily that she nearly
cried, and then Sesemi would rap on the table and call out
“Nelly!” very sharply—it sounded like “Nally”—and Madame
Kethelsen would shrink into herself and be mute.</p>

<p>Madame Kethelsen obeyed her younger sister, who scolded
her as if she were a child. Sesemi, in fact, despised her
warmly. Therese Weichbrodt was a well-read, almost a literary
woman. She struggled endlessly to keep her childhood
faith, her religious assurance that somewhere in the beyond
she was to be recompensed for the hard, dull present. But
Madame Kethelsen, innocent, uninstructed, was all simplicity
of nature. “Dear, good Nelly, what a child she is! She
never doubts or struggles, she is always happy.” In such
remarks there was always as much contempt as envy. Contempt
was a weakness of Sesemi’s—perhaps a pardonable one.</p>

<p>The small red-brick suburban house was surrounded by a
neatly kept garden. Its lofty ground floor was entirely taken
up by schoolrooms and dining-room; the bedrooms were in
the upper storey and the attic. Miss Weichbrodt did not have
a large number of pupils. As boarders she received only
older girls, while the day-school consisted of but three classes,
the lowest ones. Sesemi took care to have only the daughters
of irreproachably refined families in her house. Tony
Buddenbrook, as we have seen, she welcomed most tenderly.
She even made “bishop” for supper—a sort of sweet red
punch to be taken cold, in the making of which she was a
past mistress. “A little more beeshop,” she urged with a
hearty nod. It sounded so tempting; nobody could resist!</p>

<p>Fräulein Weichbrodt sat on two sofa-cushions at the top of
the table and presided over the meal with tact and discretion.
She held her stunted figure stiffly erect, tapped vigilantly on
the table, cried “Nally” or “Babby,” and subdued Mlle.
Popinet with a glance whenever the latter seemed about to
take unto herself all the cold veal jelly. Tony had been allotted
a place between two other boarders, Armgard von Schilling,
the strapping blond daughter of a Mecklenburg landowner,
and Gerda Arnoldsen, whose home was in Amsterdam—an
unusual, elegant figure, with dark-red hair, brown eyes
close together, and a lovely, pale, haughty face. Opposite
her sat a chattering French girl who looked like a negress,
with huge gold earrings. The lean English Miss Brown, with
her sourish smile, sat at the bottom of the table. She was
a boarder too.</p>

<p>It was not hard, with the help of Sesemi’s bishop, to get
acquainted. Mlle. Popinet had had nightmares again last
night—<i>ah, quel horreur!</i> She usually screamed “Help,
thieves; help, thieves!” until everybody jumped out of bed.
Next, it appeared that Gerda Arnoldsen did not take piano
like the rest of them, but the violin, and that Papa—her
Mother was dead—had promised her a real Stradivarius.
Tony was not musical—hardly any of the Buddenbrooks and
none of the Krögers were. She could not even recognize the
chorals they played at St. Mary’s.—Oh, the organ in the
new Church at Amsterdam had a <i>vox humana</i>—a human voice—that
was just wonderful. Armgard von Schilling talked
about the cows at home.</p>

<p>It was Armgard who from the earliest moment had made a
great impression on Tony. She was the first person from a
noble family whom Tony had ever known. What luck, to be
called <i>von</i> Schilling! Her own parents had the most beautiful
old house in the town, and her grandparents belonged to
the best families; still, they were called plain Buddenbrook
and Kröger—which was a pity, to be sure. The granddaughter
of the proud Lebrecht Kröger glowed with reverence
for Armgard’s noble birth. Privately, she sometimes thought
that the splendid “von” went with her better than it did
with Armgard; for Armgard did not appreciate her good luck,
dear, no! She had a thick pigtail, good-natured blue eyes,
and a broad Mecklenburg accent, and went about thinking
just nothing at all on the subject. She made absolutely no
pretentions to being aristocratic; in fact, she did not know
what it was. But the word “aristocratic” stuck in Tony’s small
head; and she emphatically applied it to Gerda Arnoldsen.</p>

<p>Gerda was rather exclusive, and had something foreign and
queer about her. She liked to do up her splendid red hair
in striking ways, despite Sesemi’s protests. Some of the
girls thought it was “silly” of her to play the violin instead
of the piano—and, be it known, “silly” was a term of very
severe condemnation. Still, the girls mostly agreed with
Tony that Gerda was aristocratic—in her figure, well-developed
for her years; in her ways, her small possessions, everything.
There was the ivory toilet set from Paris, for instance;
that Tony could appreciate, for her own parents and grandparents
also had treasures which had been brought from
Paris.</p>

<p>The three girls soon made friends. They were in the same
class and slept together in the same large room at the top of
the house. What delightful, cosy times they had going to
bed! They gossiped while they undressed—in undertones,
however, for it was ten o’clock and next door Mlle. Popinet
had gone to bed to dream of burglars. Eva Ewers slept with
her. Eva was a little Hamburger, whose father, an amateur
painter and collector, had settled in Munich.</p>

<p>The striped brown blinds were down, the low, red-shaded
lamp burned on the table, there was a faint smell of violets
and fresh wash, and a delicious atmosphere of laziness and
dreams.</p>

<p>“Heavens,” said Armgard, half undressed, sitting on her
bed, “how Dr. Newmann can talk! He comes into the class
and stands by the table and tells about Racine—”</p>

<p>“He has a lovely high forehead,” remarked Gerda, standing
before the mirror between the windows and combing her hair
by the light of two candles.</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, hasn’t he?” Armgard said eagerly.</p>

<p>“And you are taking the course just on his account, Armgard;
you gaze at him all the time with your blue eyes, as
if—”</p>

<p>“Are you in love with him?” asked Tony. “I can’t undo
my shoe-lace; please, Gerda. Thanks. Why don’t you marry
him? He is a good match—he will get to be a High School
Professor.”</p>

<p>“I think you are both horrid. I’m not in love with him,
and I would not marry a teacher, anyhow. I shall marry
a country gentleman.”</p>

<p>“A nobleman?” Tony dropped her stocking and looked
thoughtfully into Armgard’s face.</p>

<p>“I don’t know, yet. But he must have a large estate. Oh,
girls, I just love that sort of thing! I shall get up at five
o’clock every morning, and attend to everything....” She
pulled up the bed-covers and stared dreamily at the ceiling.</p>

<p>“Five hundred cows are before your mind’s eye,” said
Gerda, looking at her in the mirror.</p>

<p>Tony was not ready yet; but she let her head fall on the
pillow, tucked her hands behind her neck, and gazed dreamily
at the ceiling in her turn.</p>

<p>“Of course,” she said, “I shall marry a business man. He
must have a lot of money, so we can furnish elegantly. I
owe that to my family and the firm,” she added earnestly.
“Yes, you’ll see, that’s what I shall do.”</p>

<p>Gerda had finished her hair for the night and was brushing
her big white teeth, using the ivory-backed hand-mirror to
see them better.</p>

<p>“I shall <i>probably</i> not marry at all,” she said, speaking with
some difficulty on account of the tooth-powder. “I don’t see
why I should. I am not anxious. I’ll go back to Amsterdam
and play duets with Daddy and afterwards live with my
married sister.”</p>

<p>“What a pity,” Tony said briskly. “What a pity! You
ought to marry here and stay here for always. Listen: you
could marry one of my brothers—”</p>

<p>“The one with the big nose?” asked Gerda, and gave a
dainty little yawn, holding the hand-mirror before her face.</p>

<p>“Or the other; it doesn’t matter. You could furnish beautifully.
Jacobs could do it—the upholsterer in Fish Street.
He has lovely taste. I’d come to see you every day—”</p>

<p>But then there came the voice of Mlle. Popinet. It said:
“Oh, mademoiselles! Please go to bed. It is too late to get
married any more this evening!”</p>

<p>Sundays and holidays Tony spent in Meng Street or outside
the town with her grandparents. How lovely, when it was
fine on Easter Sunday, hunting for eggs and marzipan hares
in the enormous Kröger garden! Then there were the summer
holidays at the seashore; they lived in the Kurhouse, ate
at the table-d’hôte, bathed, and went donkey-riding. Some
seasons when the Consul had business, there were long journeys.
But Christmases were best of all. There were three
present-givings: at home, at the grandparents’, and at Sesemi’s,
where bishop flowed in streams. The one at home was the
grandest, for the Consul believed in keeping the holy feast
with pomp and ceremony. They gathered in the landscape-room
with due solemnity. The servants and the crowd of poor
people thronged into the pillared hall, where the Consul went
about shaking their purple hands. Then outside rose the
voices of the choir-boys from St. Mary’s in a quartette, and
one’s heart beat loudly with awe and expectation. The smell
of the Christmas tree was already coming through the crack
in the great white folding doors; and the Frau Consul took
the old family Bible with the funny big letters, and slowly
read aloud the Christmas chapter; and after the choir-boys
had sung another carol, everybody joined in “O Tannenbaum”
and went in solemn procession through the hall into the great
salon, hung with tapestries that had statuary woven into
them. There the tree rose to the ceiling, decorated with
white lilies, twinkling and sparkling and pouring out light
and fragrance; and the table with the presents on it stretched
from the windows to the door. Outside, the Italians with the
barrel-organ were making music in the frozen, snowy streets,
and a great hubbub came over from the Christmas market
in Market Square. All the children except little Clara stopped
up to late supper in the salon, and there were mountains of
carp and stuffed turkey.</p>

<p>In these years Tony Buddenbrook visited two Mecklenburg
estates. She stopped for two weeks one summer with her
friend Armgard, on Herr von Schilling’s property, which lay
on the coast across the bay from Travemünde. And another
time she went with Cousin Tilda to a place where Bernard
Buddenbrook was inspector. This estate was called “Thankless,”
because it did not bring in a penny’s income; but for
a summer holiday it was not to be despised.</p>

<p>Thus the years went on. It was, take it all in all, a happy
youth for Tony.</p>

<p></p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">PART THREE</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">On</span> a June afternoon, not long after five o’clock, the family
were sitting before the “portal” in the garden, where they had
drunk coffee. They had pulled the rustic furniture outside,
for it was too close in the whitewashed garden house, with its
tall mirror decorated with painted birds and its varnished
folding doors, which were really not folding doors at all and
had only painted latches.</p>

<p>The Consul, his wife, Tony, Tom, and Clothilde sat in a
half-circle around the table, which was laid with its usual
shining service. Christian, sitting a little to one side, conned
the second oration of Cicero against Catiline. He looked unhappy.
The Consul smoked his cigar and read the <i>Advertiser</i>.
His wife had let her embroidery fall into her lap and sat
smiling at little Clara; the child, with Ida Jungmann, was
looking for violets in the grass-plot. Tony, her head propped
on both hands, was deep in Hoffman’s “Serapion Brethren,”
while Tom tickled her in the back of the neck with a grass-blade,
an attention which she very wisely ignored. And Clothilde,
looking thin and old-maidish in her flowered cotton
frock, was reading a story called “Blind, Deaf, Dumb, and
Still Happy.” As she read, she scraped up the biscuit-crumbs
carefully with all five fingers from the cloth and ate them.</p>

<p>A few white clouds stood motionless in the slowly paling
sky. The small town garden, with its carefully laid-out paths
and beds, looked gay and tidy in the afternoon sun. The
scent of the mignonette borders floated up now and then.</p>

<p>“Well, Tom,” said the Consul expansively, and took the
cigar out of his mouth, “we are arranging that rye sale I told
you about, with van Henkdom and Company.”</p>

<p>“What is he giving?” Tom asked with interest, ceasing to
tickle Tony.</p>

<p>“Sixty thaler for a thousand kilo—not bad, eh?”</p>

<p>“That’s very good.” Tom knew this was excellent business.</p>

<p>“Tony, your position is not <i>comme il faut</i>,” remarked the
Frau Consul. Whereat Tony, without raising her eyes from
her book, took one elbow off the table.</p>

<p>“Never mind,” Tony said. “She can sit how she likes, she
will always be Tony Buddenbrook. Tilda and she are certainly
the beauties of the family.”</p>

<p>Clothilde was astonished almost to death. “Good gracious,
Tom,” she said. It was inconceivable how she could drawl out
the syllables. Tony bore the jeer in silence. It was never
any use, Tom was more than a match for her. He could always
get the last word and have the laugh on his side. Her
nostrils dilated a little, and she shrugged her shoulders. But
when the Consul’s wife began to talk of the coming dance at
the house of Consul Huneus, and let fall something about new
patent leather shoes, Tony took the other elbow off the table
and displayed a lively interest.</p>

<p>“You keep talking and talking,” complained Christian fretfully,
“and I’m having such a hard time. I wish I were a
business man.”</p>

<p>“Yes, you’re always wanting something different,” said Tom.
Anton came across the garden with a card on his tray. They
all looked at him expectantly.</p>

<p>“Grünlich, Agent,” read the Consul. “He is from Hamburg—an
agreeable man, and well recommended, the son of
a clergyman. I have business dealings with him. There is a
piece of business now.—Is it all right, Betsy, if I ask him
to come out here?”</p>

<p>A middle-sized man, his head thrust a little forward of his
body, carrying his hat and stick in one hand, came across
the garden. He was some two-and-thirty years old; he wore
a fuzzy greenish-yellow suit with a long-skirted coat, and grey
worsted gloves. His face, beneath the sparse light hair, was
rosy and smiling; but there was an undeniable wart on one
side of his nose. His chin and upper lip were smooth-shaven;
he wore long, drooping side-whiskers, in the English fashion,
and these adornments were conspicuously golden-yellow in
colour. Even at a distance, he began making obsequious
gestures with his broad-brimmed grey hat, and as he drew
near he took one last very long step, and arrived describing
a half-circle with the upper part of his body, by this means
bowing to them all at once.</p>

<p>“I am afraid I am disturbing the family circle,” he said
in a soft voice, with the utmost delicacy of manner. “You
are conversing, you are indulging in literary pursuits—I must
really beg your pardon for my intrusion.”</p>

<p>“By no means, my dear Herr Grünlich,” said the Consul.
He and his sons got up and shook hands with the stranger.
“You are very welcome. I am delighted to see you outside
the office and in my family circle. Herr Grünlich, Betsy—a
friend of mine and a keen man of business. This is my
daughter Antonie, and my niece Clothilde. Thomas you know
already, and this is my second son, Christian, in High School.”
Herr Grünlich responded to each name with an inclination
of the body.</p>

<p>“I must repeat,” he said, “that I have no desire to intrude.
I came on business. If the Herr Consul would be so good
as to take a walk with me round the gardens—” The Consul’s
wife answered: “It will give us pleasure to have
you sit down with us for a little before you begin to talk
business with my husband. Do sit down.”</p>

<p>“A thousand thanks,” said Herr Grünlich, apparently quite
flattered. He sat down on the edge of the chair which Tom
brought, laid his hat and stick on his knees, and settled himself,
running his hand over his long beard with a little hemming
and hawing, as if to say, “Well, now we’ve got past the
introduction—what next?”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul began the conversation. “You live in
Hamburg?” she asked, inclining her head and letting her work
fall into her lap.</p>

<p>“Yes, Frau Consul,” responded Herr Grünlich with a fresh
bow. “At least, my house is in Hamburg, but I am on the
road a good deal. My business is very flourishing—ahem—if
I may be permitted to say so.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul lifted her eyebrows and made respectful
motions with her mouth, as if she were saying “Ah—indeed?”</p>

<p>“Ceaseless activity is a condition of my being,” added he,
half turning to the Consul. He coughed again as he noticed
that Fräulein Antonie’s glance rested upon him. She gave
him, in fact, the cold, calculating stare with which a maiden
measures a strange young man—a stare which seems always
on the point of passing over into actual contempt.</p>

<p>“We have relatives in Hamburg,” said she, in order to be
saying something.</p>

<p>“The Duchamps,” explained the Consul. “The family of
my late Mother.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes,” Herr Grünlich hastened to say. “I have the
honour of a slight acquaintance with the family. They are
very fine people, in mind and heart. Ahem! This would be
a better world if there were more families like them in it.
They have religion, benevolence, and genuine piety; in short,
they are my ideal of the true Christlike spirit. And in them
it is united to a rare degree with a brilliant cosmopolitanism,
an elegance, an aristocratic bearing, which I find most attractive,
Frau Consul.”</p>

<p>Tony thought: “How can he know my Father and Mother
so well? He is saying exactly what they like best to hear.”
The Consul responded approvingly, “The combination is one
that is becoming in everybody.” And the Frau Consul could
not resist stretching out her hand to their guest with her sweeping
gesture, palm upward, while the bracelets gave a little
jingle. “You speak as though you read my inmost thoughts,
dear Herr Grünlich,” she said.</p>

<p>Upon which, Herr Grünlich made another deep bow, settled
himself again, stroked his beard, and coughed as if to say:
“Well, let us get on.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul mentioned the disastrous fire which had
swept Hamburg in May of the year 1842. “Yes, indeed,”
said Herr Grünlich, “truly a fearful misfortune. A distressing
visitation. The loss amounted to one hundred and
thirty-five millions, at a rough estimate. I am grateful to
Providence that I came off without any loss whatever. The
fire raged chiefly in the parishes of St. Peter and St. Nicholas.—What
a charming garden!” he interrupted himself, taking
the cigar which the Consul offered. “It is so large for a town
garden, and the beds of colour are magnificent. I confess
my weakness for flowers, and for nature in general. Those
climbing roses over there trim up the garden uncommonly
well.” He went on, praising the refinement of the location,
praising the town itself, praising the Consul’s cigar. He had
a pleasant word for each member of the circle.</p>

<p>“May I venture to inquire what you are reading, Fräulein
Antonie?” he said smiling.</p>

<p>Tony drew her brows together sharply at this, for some
reason, and answered without looking at him, “Hoffmann’s
‘Serapion Brethren.’”</p>

<p>“Really! He is a wonderful writer, is he not? Ah, pardon
me—I forget the name of your younger son, Frau Consul?”</p>

<p>“Christian.”</p>

<p>“A beautiful name. If I may so express myself”—here he
turned again to the Consul—“I like best the names which
show that the bearer is a Christian. The name of Johann,
I know, is hereditary in your family—a name which always
recalls the beloved disciple. My own name—if I may be
permitted to mention it,” he continued, waxing eloquent, “is
that of most of my forefathers—Bendix. It can only be
regarded as a shortened form of Benedict. And you, Herr
Buddenbrook, are reading—? ah, Cicero. The works of this
great Roman orator make pretty difficult reading, eh? ‘Quousque
tandem—Catalina’ ... ahem. Oh, I have not forgotten
quite all my Latin.”</p>

<p>“I disagree with my late Father on this point,” the Consul
said. “I have always objected to the perpetual occupation
of young heads with Greek and Latin. When there are so
many other important subjects, necessary as a preparation
for the practical affairs of life—”</p>

<p>“You take the words out of my mouth,” Herr Grünlich
hastened to say. “It is hard reading, and not by any means
always unexceptionable—I forgot to mention that point.
Everything else aside, I can recall passages that were positively
offensive—”</p>

<p>There came a pause, and Tony thought “Now it’s my turn.”
Herr Grünlich had turned his gaze upon her. And, sure
enough: he suddenly started in his chair, made a spasmodic
but always highly elegant gesture toward the Frau Consul,
and whispered ardently, “Pray look, Frau Consul, I beg of
you.—Fräulein, I implore you,” he interrupted himself
aloud, just as if Tony could not hear the rest of what he
said, “to keep in that same position for just a moment. Do
you see,” he began whispering again, “how the sunshine is
playing in your daughter’s hair? Never,” he said solemnly,
as if transported, speaking to nobody in particular, “have I
seen more beautiful hair.” It was as if he were addressing
his remarks to God or to his own soul.</p>

<p>The Consul’s wife smiled, well pleased. The Consul said,
“Don’t be putting notions into the girl’s head.” And again
Tony drew her brows together without speaking. After a
short pause, Herr Grünlich got up.</p>

<p>“But I won’t disturb you any longer now—no, Frau Consul,
I refuse to disturb you any longer,” he repeated. “I only
came on business, but I could not resist—indeed, who could
resist you? Now duty calls. May I ask the Consul—”</p>

<p>“I hope I do not need to assure you that it would give
us pleasure if you would let us put you up while you are
here,” said the Frau Consul. Herr Grünlich appeared for the
moment struck dumb with gratitude. “From my soul I am
grateful, Frau Consul,” he said, and his look was indeed eloquent
with emotion. “But I must not abuse your kindness.
I have a couple of rooms at the City of Hamburg—”</p>

<p>“A <i>couple</i> of rooms,” thought the Frau Consul—which was
just what Herr Grünlich meant her to think.</p>

<p>“And, in any case,” he said, as she offered her hand cordially,
“I hope we have not seen each other for the last
time.” He kissed her hand, waited a moment for Antonie
to extend hers—which she did not do—described another
half-circle with his upper torso, made a long step backward
and another bow, threw back his head and put his hat on with
a flourish, then walked away in company with the Consul.</p>

<p>“A pleasant man,” the Father said later, when he came
back and took his place again.</p>

<p>“I think he’s silly,” Tony permitted herself to remark with
some emphasis.</p>

<p>“Tony! Heavens and earth, what an idea!” said the Consul’s
wife, displeased. “Such a Christian young man!”</p>

<p>“So well brought up, and so cosmopolitan,” went on the
Consul. “You don’t know what you are talking about.” He
and his wife had a way of taking each other’s side like this,
out of sheer politeness. It made them the more likely to
agree.</p>

<p>Christian wrinkled up his long nose and said, “He was so
important. ‘You are conversing’—when we weren’t at all.
And the roses over there ‘trim things up uncommonly.’ He
acted some of the time as if he were talking to himself. ‘I
am disturbing you’—‘I beg pardon’—‘I have never seen more
beautiful hair.’” Christian mocked Herr Grünlich so cleverly
that they all had to laugh, even the Consul.</p>

<p>“Yes, he gave himself too many airs,” Tony went on. “He
talked the whole time about himself—<i>his</i> business is good,
and <i>he</i> is fond of nature, and <i>he</i> likes such-and-such names,
and <i>his</i> name is Bendix—what is all that to us, I’d like to
know? Everything he said was just to spread himself.” Her
voice was growing louder all the time with vexation. “He
said all the very things you like to hear, Mamma and Papa,
and he said them just to make a fine impression on you both.”</p>

<p>“That is no reproach, Tony,” the Consul said sternly.
“Everybody puts his best foot foremost before strangers. We
all take care to say what will be pleasant to hear. That is a
commonplace.”</p>

<p>“I think he is a good man,” Clothilde pronounced with
drawling serenity—she was the only person in the circle about
whom Herr Grünlich had not troubled himself at all. Thomas
refrained from giving an opinion.</p>

<p>“Enough,” concluded the Consul. “He is a capable, cultured,
and energetic Christian man, and you, Tony, should
try to bridle your tongue—a great girl of eighteen or nineteen
years old, like you! And after he was so polite and gallant
to you, too. We are all weak creatures; and you, let me
say, are one of the last to have a right to throw stones. Tom,
we’ll get to work.”</p>

<p>Pert little Tony muttered to herself “A golden goat’s
beard!” and scowled as before.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Tony</span>, coming back from a walk some days later, met Herr
Grünlich at the corner of Meng Street. “I was most grieved
to have missed you, Fräulein,” he said. “I took the liberty
of paying my respects to your Mother the other day, and I
regretted your absence more than I can say. How delightful
that I should meet you like this!”</p>

<p>Fräulein Buddenbrook had paused as he began to speak;
but her half-shut eyes looked no further up than the height
of Herr Grünlich’s chest. On her lips rested the mocking,
merciless smile with which a young girl measures and rejects
a man. Her lips moved—what should she say? It must be
something that would demolish this Herr Bendix Grünlich
once and for all—simply annihilate him. It must be clever,
witty, and effective, must at one and the same time wound him
to the quick and impress him tremendously.</p>

<p>“The pleasure is not mutual, Herr Grünlich,” said she,
keeping her gaze meanwhile levelled at his chest. And after
she had shot this poisoned arrow, she left him standing there
and went home, her head in the air, her face red with pride
in her own powers of repartee—to learn that Herr Grünlich
had been invited to dinner next Sunday.</p>

<p>And he came. He came in a not quite new-fashioned, rather
wrinkled, but still handsome bell-shaped frock-coat which
gave him a solid, respectable look. He was rosy and smiling,
his scant hair carefully parted, his whiskers curled and
scented. He ate a ragout of shell-fish, julienne soup, fried
soles, roast veal with creamed potatoes and cauliflower, maraschino
pudding, and pumpernickel with roquefort; and he
found a fresh and delicate compliment for each fresh course.
Over the sweet he lifted his dessert-spoon, gazed at one of
the tapestry statues, and spoke aloud to himself, thus: “God
forgive me, I have eaten far too well already. But this pudding—!
It is <i>too</i> wonderful! I must beg my good hostess
for another slice.” And he looked roguishly at the Consul’s
wife. With the Consul he talked business and politics, and
spoke soundly and weightily. He discussed the theatre and
the fashions with the Frau Consul, and he had a good word
for Tom and Christian and Clothilde, and even for little Clara
and Ida Jungmann. Tony sat in silence, and he did not undertake
to engage her; only gazing at her now and then, with
his head a little tilted, his face looking dejected and encouraged
by turns.</p>

<p>When Herr Grünlich took his leave that evening, he had
only strengthened the impressions left by his first visit. “A
thoroughly well-bred man,” said the Frau Consul. “An
estimable Christian gentleman” was the Consul’s opinion.
Christian imitated his speech and actions even better than before;
and Tony said her good nights to them all with a frowning
brow, for something told her that she had not yet seen the
last of this gentleman who had won the hearts of her parents
with such astonishing ease and rapidity.</p>

<p>And, sure enough, coming back one afternoon from a visit
with some girl friends, she found Herr Grünlich cosily established
in the landscape-room, reading aloud to the Frau Consul
out of Sir Walter Scott’s “Waverly.” His pronunciation
was perfect, for, as he explained, his business trips had taken
him to England. Tony sat down apart with another book, and
Herr Grünlich softly questioned: “Our book is not to your
taste, Fräulein?” To which she replied, with her head in
the air, something in a sarcastic vein, like “Not in the very
least.”</p>

<p>But he was not taken aback. He began to talk about his
long-dead parents and communicated the fact that his father
had been a clergyman, a Christian, and at the same time a
highly cosmopolitan gentleman.—After this visit, he departed
for Hamburg. Tony was not there when he called
to take leave. “Ida,” she said to Mamsell Jungmann, “Ida,
the man has gone.” But Mamsell Jungmann only replied,
“You’ll see, child.”</p>

<p>And eight days later, in fact, came that scene in the breakfast
room. Tony came down at nine o’clock and found her
father and mother still at table. She let her forehead be
kissed and sat down, fresh and hungry, her eyes still red with
sleep, and helped herself to sugar, butter, and herb cheese.</p>

<p>“How nice to find you still here, for once, Papa,” she said
as she held her egg in her napkin and opened it with her
spoon.</p>

<p>“But to-day I have been waiting for our slug-a-bed,” said
the Consul. He was smoking and tapping on the table with
his folded newspaper. His wife finished her breakfast with
her slow, graceful motions, and leaned back in the sofa.</p>

<p>“Tilda is already busy in the kitchen,” went on the Consul,
“and I should have been long since at work myself, if your
Mother and I had not been speaking seriously about a matter
that concerns our little daughter.”</p>

<p>Tony, her mouth full of bread and butter, looked first at
her father and then her mother, with a mixture of fear and
curiosity.</p>

<p>“Eat your breakfast, my child,” said the Frau Consul. But
Tony laid down her knife and cried, “Out with it quickly,
Papa—please.” Her father only answered: “Eat your breakfast
first.”</p>

<p>So Tony drank her coffee and ate her egg and bread and
cheese silently, her appetite quite gone. She began to guess.
The fresh morning bloom disappeared from her cheek, and she
even grew a little pale. She said “Thank you” for the
honey, and soon after announced in a subdued voice that she
had finished.</p>

<p>“My dear child,” said the Consul, “the matter we desire
to talk over with you is contained in this letter.” He was
tapping the table now with a big blue envelope instead of the
newspaper. “To be brief: Bendix Grünlich, whom we have
learned, during his short stay here, to regard as a good and
a charming man, writes to me that he has conceived a strong
inclination for our daughter, and he here makes a request in
form for her hand. What does my child say?”</p>

<p>Tony was leaning back in her seat, her head bent, her
right hand slowly twirling the silver napkin-ring round and
round. But suddenly she looked up, and her eyes had grown
quite dark with tears. She said, her voice full of distress:
“What does this man want of me? What have I done to
him?” And she burst into weeping.</p>

<p>The Consul shot a glance at his wife and then regarded
his empty cup, embarrassed.</p>

<p>“Tony dear,” said the Frau Consul gently, “why this—<i>échauffement</i>?
You know quite well your parents can only
desire your good. And they cannot counsel you to reject
forthwith the position offered you. I know you feel so far no
particular inclination for Herr Grünlich, but that will come;
I assure you it comes, with time. Such a young thing as you
is never sure what she wants. The mind is as confused as
the heart. One must just give the heart time—and keep the
mind open to the advice of experienced people who think
and plan only for our good.”</p>

<p>“I don’t know him the least little bit,” Tony said in a dejected
tone, wiping her eyes on the little white batiste serviette,
stained with egg. “All I know is, he has a yellow beard,
like a goat’s, and a flourishing business—” Her upper lip,
trembling on the verge of tears, had an expression that was
indescribably touching.</p>

<p>With a movement of sudden tenderness the Consul jerked
his chair nearer hers and stroked her hair, smiling.</p>

<p>“My little Tony, what should you like to know of him?
You are still a very young girl, you know. You would
know him no better if he had been here for fifty-two weeks
instead of four. You are a child, with no eyes yet for the
world, and you must trust other people who mean well by
you.”</p>

<p>“I don’t understand—I don’t understand,” Tony sobbed
helplessly, and put down her head as a kitten does beneath
the hand that strokes it. “He comes here and says something
pleasant to everybody, and then goes away again; and then he
writes to you that he—that I—I don’t understand. What
made him? What have I done to him?”</p>

<p>The Consul smiled again. “You said that once before,
Tony; and it illustrates so well your childish way of reasoning.
My little daughter must not feel that people mean to
urge or torment her. We can consider it all very quietly; in
fact, we must consider it all very quietly and calmly, for it
is a very serious matter. Meanwhile I will write an answer
to Herr Grünlich’s letter, without either consenting or refusing.
There is much to be thought of.—Well, is that
agreed? What do you say?—And now Papa can go back
to his work, can’t he?—Adieu, Betsy.”</p>

<p>“Au revoir, dear Jean.”</p>

<p>“Do take a little more honey, Tony,” said the Frau Consul
to her daughter, who sat in her place motionless, with her
head bent. “One must eat.”</p>

<p>Tony’s tears gradually dried. Her head felt hot and heavy
with her thoughts. Good gracious, what a business! She
had always known, of course, that she should one day marry,
and be the wife of a business man, and embark upon a solid
and advantageous married life, commensurate with the position
of the family and the firm. But suddenly, for the first time
in her life, somebody, some actual person, in serious earnest,
wanted to marry her. How did people act? To her, her,
Tony Buddenbrook, were now applicable all those tremendous
words and phrases which she had hitherto met with only in
books: her “hand,” her “consent,” “as long as life shall last!”
Goodness gracious, what a step to take, all at once!</p>

<p>“And you, Mamma? Do you too advise me to—to—to yield
my consent?” She hesitated a little before the “yield my consent.”
It sounded high-flown and awkward. But then, this
was the first occasion in her life that was worthy of fine
language. She began to blush for her earlier lack of self-control.
It seemed to her now not less unreasonable than
it had ten minutes ago that she should marry Herr Grünlich;
but the dignity of her situation began to fill her with a sense
of importance which was satisfying indeed.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> advise you to accept, my child? Has Papa advised you
to do so? He has only not advised you not to, that is all. It
would be very irresponsible of either of us to do that. The
connection offered you is a very good one, my dear Tony.
You would go to Hamburg on an excellent footing and live
there in great style.”</p>

<p>Tony sat motionless. She was having a sort of vision of
silk portières, like those in grandfather’s salon. And, as
Madame Grünlich, should she drink morning chocolate? She
thought it would not be seemly to ask.</p>

<p>“As your Father says, you have time to consider,” the Frau
Consul continued. “But we are obliged to tell you that
such an offer does not come every day, that it would make
your fortune, and that it is exactly the marriage which duty
and vocation prescribe. This, my child, it is my business
to tell you. You know yourself that the path which opens
before you to-day is the prescribed one which your life ought
to follow.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Tony said thoughtfully. She was well aware of her
responsibilities toward the family and the firm, and she was
proud of them. She was saturated with her family history—she,
Tony Buddenbrook, who, as the daughter of Consul Buddenbrook,
went about the town like a little queen, before
whom Matthiesen the porter took off his hat and made a low
bow! The Rostock tailor had been very well off, to begin
with; but since his time, the family fortunes had advanced by
leaps and bounds. It was her vocation to enhance the brilliance
of family and firm in her allotted way, by making a
rich and aristocratic marriage. To the same end, Tom worked
in the office. Yes, the marriage was undoubtedly precisely
the right one. But—but— She saw him before her, saw his
gold-yellow whiskers, his rosy, smiling face, the wart on his
nose, his mincing walk. She could feel his woolly suit, hear
his soft voice....</p>

<p>“I felt sure,” the Consul’s wife said, “that we were accessible
to quiet reason. Have we perhaps already made up
our mind?”</p>

<p>“Oh, goodness, <i>no</i>!” cried Tony, suddenly. She uttered
the “Oh” with an outburst of irritation. “What nonsense!
Why should I marry him? I have always made fun of him.
I never did anything else. I can’t understand how he can
possibly endure me. The man must have some sort of pride
in his bones!” She began to drip honey upon a slice of
bread.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">This</span> year the Buddenbrooks took no holiday during Christian’s
and Clara’s vacation. The Consul said he was too busy;
but it was Tony’s unsettled affair as well, that kept them lingering
in Mengstrasse. A very diplomatic letter, written by
the Consul himself, had been dispatched to Herr Grünlich;
but the progress of the wooing was hindered by Tony’s obstinacy.
She expressed herself in the most childish way.
“Heaven forbid, Mamma,” she would say. “I simply can’t
en<i>dure</i> him!” with tremendous emphasis on the second syllable.
Or she would explain solemnly, “Father” (Tony never
otherwise said anything but “Papa”), “I can never yield him
my consent.”</p>

<p>And at this point the matter would assuredly have stuck,
had it not been for events that occurred some ten days after
the talk in the breakfast-room—in other words, about the middle
of July.</p>

<p>It was afternoon—a hot blue afternoon. The Frau Consul
was out, and Tony sat with a book alone at the window of
the landscape-room, when Anton brought her a card. Before
she had time to read the name, a young man in a bell-skirted
coat and pea-green pantaloons entered the room. It
was, of course, Herr Grünlich, with an expression of imploring
tenderness upon his face.</p>

<p>Tony started up indignantly and made a movement to flee
into the next room. How could one possibly talk to a man
who had proposed for one’s hand? Her heart was in her
throat and she had gone very pale. While he had been at
a safe distance she had hugely enjoyed the solemn conferences
with her Father and Mother and the suddenly enhanced importance
of her own person and destiny. But now, here he
was—he stood before her. What was going to happen? And
again she felt that she was going to weep.</p>

<p>At a rapid stride, his head tipped on one side, his arms
outstretched, with the air of a man who says: “Here I am,
kill me if you will!” he approached. “What a providence!”
he cried. “I find you here, Antonie—” (He said “Antonie”!)</p>

<p>Tony stood erect, her novel in her right hand. She stuck
out her lips and gave her head a series of little jerks upward,
relieving her irritation by stressing, in that manner, each word
as she spoke it. She got out “What is the matter with you?”—But
the tears were already rising. And Herr Grünlich’s
own excitement was too great for him to realize the check.</p>

<p>“How could I wait longer? Was I not driven to return?”
he said in impassioned tones. “A week ago I had your Father’s
letter, which filled me with hope. I could bear it no
longer. Could I thus linger on in half-certainty? I threw
myself into a carriage, I hastened hither, I have taken a couple
of rooms at the City of Hamburg—and here I am, Antonie,
to hear from your lips the final word which will make me
happier than I can express.”</p>

<p>Tony was stunned. Her tears retreated abashed. This,
then, was the effect of her Father’s careful letter, which had
indefinitely postponed the decision. Two or three times she
stammered: “You are mistaken—you are mistaken.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich had drawn an arm-chair close to her seat
in the window. He sat down, he obliged her to sit as well,
and, bowing over her hand, which, limp with indecision, she
resigned to him, he went on in a trembling voice: “Fräulein
Antonie, since first I saw you, that afternoon,—do you remember
that afternoon, when I saw you, a vision of loveliness,
in your own family circle?—Since then, your name has been
indelibly written on my heart.” He went back, corrected
himself, and said “graven”: “Since that day, Fräulein Antonie,
it has been my only, my most ardent wish, to win your
beautiful hand. What your Father’s letter permitted me only
to hope, that I implore you to confirm to me now in all certainty.
I may feel sure of your consent—I may be assured of
it?” He took her other hand in his and looked deep into her
wide-open, frightened eyes. He had left off his worsted gloves
to-day, and his hands were long and white, marked with blue
veins. Tony stared at his pink face, at his wart, at his eyes,
which were as blue as a goose’s.</p>

<p>“Oh, no, no,” she broke out, rapidly, in terror. And then
she added, “No, I will never yield my consent.” She took
great pains to speak firmly, but she was already in tears.</p>

<p>“How have I deserved this doubt and hesitation?” he asked
in a lower, well-nigh reproachful tone. “I know you are a
maiden cherished and sheltered by the most loving care. But
I swear to you, I pledge you my word of honour as a man,
that I would carry you in my arms, that as my wife you would
lack nothing, that you would live in Hamburg a life altogether
worthy of you—”</p>

<p>Tony sprang up. She freed her hand and, with the tears
rolling down her cheeks, cried out in desperation, “No, no!
I said <i>no</i>! I am refusing you—for heaven’s sake, can’t you
understand?” Then Herr Grünlich rose up too. He took one
backward step and stretched out his arms toward her, palms
up. Seriously, like a man of honour and resolution, he spoke.</p>

<p>“Mademoiselle Buddenbrook, you understand that I cannot
permit myself to be insulted?”</p>

<p>“But I am not insulting you, Herr Grünlich,” said Tony,
repenting her brusqueness. Oh, dear, oh dear, <i>why</i> did all
this have to happen to her? Such a wooing as this she had
never imagined. She had supposed that one only had to say:
“Your offer does me great honour, but I cannot accept it,”
and that would be an end of the matter. “Your offer does me
great honour,” she said, as calmly as she could, “but I cannot
accept it. And now I must go; please excuse me—I am
busy—” But Herr Grünlich stood in front of her.</p>

<p>“You reject me?” he said gloomily.</p>

<p>“Yes,” Tony said; adding with tact, “unfortunately.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich gave a gusty sigh. He took two big steps
backward, bent his torso to one side, pointed with his forefinger
to the carpet and said in an awful voice: “Antonie!”
Thus for the space of a moment they stood, he in a posture
of commanding rage, Tony pale, weepy, and trembling, her
damp handkerchief to her mouth. Then he turned from her
and, with his hands on his back, measured the room twice
through, as if he were at home. He paused at the window
and looked out into the early dusk. Tony moved cautiously
toward the glass doors, but she got only as far as the middle
of the room when he stood beside her again.</p>

<p>“Tony!” he murmured, and gently took her hand. Then he
sank, yes, he sank slowly upon his knees beside her! His
two gold whiskers lay across her hand!</p>

<p>“Tony!” he repeated. “You behold me here—you see to
what you have brought me. Have you a heart to feel what I
endure? Listen. You behold a man condemned to death, devoted
to destruction, a man who—who will certainly die of
grief,” he interrupted himself, “if you scorn his love. Here
I lie. Can you find it in your heart to say: ‘I despise you’?”</p>

<p>“No, no,” Tony said quickly in a consoling tone. Her
tears were conquered, pity stirred. Heavens, how he must
adore her, to go on like that, while she herself felt completely
indifferent! Was it to her, Tony Buddenbrook, that
all this was happening? One read of it in the novels. But
here in real life was a man in a frock-coat, on his knees in
front of her, weeping, imploring. The idea of marrying him
was simply idiotic, because she had found him silly; but just
at this moment he did not seem silly; heavens, no! Honourable,
upright, desperate entreaty were in his voice and face.</p>

<p>“No, no,” she repeated, bending over him quite touched.
“I don’t despise you, Herr Grünlich. How can you say such
a thing? Do get up—please do!”</p>

<p>“Then you will not kill me?” he asked again; and she answered,
in a consoling, almost motherly tone, “No, no.”</p>

<p>“That is a promise!” he cried, springing to his feet. But
when he saw Tony’s frightened face he got down again and
went on in a wheedling tone: “Good, good, say no more,
Antonie. Enough, for this time. We shall speak of this
again. No more now—farewell. I will return—farewell!”
He had got quickly to his feet. He took his broad grey hat
from the table, kissed her hand, and was out through the glass
doors in a twinkling.</p>

<p>Tony saw him take his stick from the hall and disappear
down the corridor. She stood, bewildered and worn out, in
the middle of the room, with the damp handkerchief in one
of her limp hands.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Consul Buddenbrook</span> said to his wife: “If I thought Tony
had a motive in refusing this match— But she is a child,
Betsy. She enjoys going to balls and being courted by the
young fellows; she is quite aware that she is pretty and from
a good family. Of course, it is possible that she is consciously
or unconsciously seeking a mate herself—but I know the child,
and I feel sure she has never yet found her heart, as the
saying goes. If you asked her, she would turn this way and
that way, and consider—but she would find nobody. She is
a child, a little bird, a hoyden. Directly she once says yes,
she will find her place. She will have <i>carte blanche</i> to set
herself up, and she will love her husband, after a few days.
He is no beau, God knows. But he is perfectly presentable.
One mustn’t ask for five legs on a sheep, as we say in business.
If she waits for somebody to come along who is an Adonis
and a good match to boot—well, God bless us, Tony Buddenbrook
could always find a husband, but it’s a risk, after all.
Every day is fishing-day, but not every day catching-day, to
use another homely phrase—. Yesterday I had a long talk
with Grünlich. He is a most constant wooer. He showed me
all his books. They are good enough to frame. I told him
I was completely satisfied. The business is young, but in
fine condition—assets must be somewhere about a hundred
and twenty thousand thaler, and that is obviously only the
situation at the moment, for he makes a good slice every year.
I asked the Duchamps. What they said doesn’t sound at all
bad. They don’t know his connections, but he lives like a
gentleman, mingles in society, and his business is known to be
expanding. And some other people in Hamburg have told me
things—a banker named Kesselmeyer, for instance—that I
feel pleased with. In short, as you know, Betsy, I can only
wish for the consummation of this match, which would be
highly advantageous for the family and the firm. I am
heartily sorry the child feels so pressed. She hardly speaks
at all, and acts as if she were in a state of siege. But I can’t
bring myself to refuse him out and out. You know, Betsy,
there is another thing I can’t emphasize often enough: in
these last years we haven’t been doing any too brilliantly.
Not that there’s anything to complain of. Oh, no. Faithful
work always finds its reward. Business goes quietly on—but
a bit too quietly for me. And it only does that because I am
eternally vigilant. We haven’t perceptibly advanced since
Father was taken away. The times aren’t good for merchants.
No, our prospects are not too bright. Our daughter is in a
position to make a marriage that would undoubtedly be
honourable and advantageous; she is of an age to marry, and
she ought to do it. Delay isn’t advisable—it isn’t advisable,
Betsy. Speak to her again. I said all I could, this afternoon.”</p>

<p>Tony was besieged, as the Consul said. She no longer
said no—but she could not bring herself to say yes. She
could not wring a “yes” out of herself—God knew why; she
did not.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, first her Father would draw her aside and
speak seriously, and then her Mother would take up the tale,
both pressing for a decision. Uncle Gotthold and family
were not brought into the affair; their attitude toward the
Mengstrasse was not exactly sympathetic. But Sesemi Weichbrodt
got wind of it and came to give good advice, with correct
enunciation. Even Mademoiselle Jungmann said, “Tony, my
little one, why should you worry? You will always be in
the best society.” And Tony could not pay a visit to the
admired silken salon outside the Castle Gate without getting
a dose from old Madame Kröger: “À propos, little one, I
hear there is an affair! I hope you are going to listen to
reason, child.”</p>

<p>One Sunday, as she sat in St. Mary’s with her parents and
brothers, Pastor Kölling began preaching from the text about
the wife leaving father and mother and cleaving only to her
husband. His language was so violent that she began listening
with a jump, staring up to see if he were looking at her.
No, thank goodness, his head was turned in the other direction,
and he seemed to be preaching in general to all the
faithful. Still, it was plain that this was a new attack upon
her,—every word struck home. A young, a still childish girl,
he said, could have as yet no will and no wisdom; and if she
set herself up against the loving advice of her parents she
was as deserving of punishment as the guilty are; she was
one of those whom the Lord spews out of his mouth. With
this phrase, which the kind Pastor Kölling adored, she encountered
a piercing glance from his eyes, as he made a threatening
gesture with his right arm. Tony saw how her Father, sitting
next to her, raised his hand, as though he would say, “Not so
hard.” But it was perfectly plain that either he or her Mother
had let the Pastor into the secret. Tony crouched in her
place with her face like fire, and felt the eyes of all the
world upon her. Next Sunday she flatly refused to go to
church.</p>

<p>She moved dumbly about the house, she laughed no more,
she lost her appetite. Sometimes she gave such heart-breaking
sighs as would move a stone to pity. She was growing thinner
too, and would soon lose her freshness. It would not do.
At length the Consul said:</p>

<p>“This cannot go on, Betsy. We must not ill-use the child.
She must get away a bit, to rest and be able to think quietly.
You’ll see she will listen to reason then. I can’t leave, and
the holidays are almost over. But there is no need for us to
go. Yesterday old Schwarzkopf from Travemünde was here,
and I spoke to him. He said he would be glad to take the
child for a while. I’d give them something for it. She
would have a good home, where she could bathe and be in
the fresh air and get clear in her mind. Tom can take her—so
it’s all arranged. Better to-morrow than day after.”</p>

<p>Tony was much pleased with this idea. True, she hardly
ever saw Herr Grünlich, but she knew he was in town, in
touch with her parents. Any day he might appear before her
and begin shrieking and importuning. She would feel safer
at Travemünde, in a strange house. So she packed her trunk
with alacrity, and on one of the last days in July she mounted
with Tom into the majestic Kröger equipage. She said good-bye
in the best of spirits; and breathed more freely as they
drove out of the Castle Gate.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> road to Travemünde first crosses the ferry and then goes
straight ahead. The grey high-road glided away under the
hoofs of Lebrecht Kröger’s fat brown Mecklenburgs. The
sound of their trotting was hollow and rhythmical, the sun
burned hot, and dust concealed the meagre view. The family
had eaten at one o’clock, an hour earlier than usual, and the
brother and sister set out punctually at two. They would
arrive shortly after four; for what a hired carriage could do
in three hours, the Kröger pair were mettlesome enough to
make in two.</p>

<p>Tony sat half asleep, nodding under her broad straw hat
and her lace-trimmed parasol, which she held tipped back
against the hood of the chaise. The parasol was twine-grey,
with cream-coloured lace, and matched her neat, simply cut
frock. She reclined in the luxurious ease proper to the
equipage, with her feet, in their white stockings and strap
shoes, daintily crossed before her.</p>

<p>Tom was already twenty years old. He wore an extremely
well-cut blue suit, and sat smoking Russian cigarettes, with
his hat on the back of his head. He was not very tall; but
already he boasted a considerable moustache, darker in tone
than his brows and eyelashes. He had one eyebrow lifted a
trifle—a habit with him—and sat looking at the dust and the
trees that fled away behind them as the carriage rolled on.</p>

<p>Tony said: “I was never so glad to come to Travemünde
before—for various reasons. You needn’t laugh, Tom. I
wish I could leave a certain pair of yellow mutton-chops even
further behind! And then, it will be an entirely different
Travemünde at the Schwarzkopfs’, on the sea front. I shan’t
be bothered with the Kurhouse society, I can tell you that
much. I am not in the mood for it. Besides, that—that
man could come there too as well as not. He has nerve
enough—it wouldn’t trouble him at all. Some day he’d be
bobbing up in front of me and putting on all his airs and
graces.”</p>

<p>Tom threw away the stub of his cigarette and took a fresh
one out of the box, a pretty little affair with an inlaid picture
inside the lid, of an overturned troika being set upon by
wolves. It was a present from a Russian customer of the
Consul. The cigarettes, those biting little trifles with the
yellow mouthpiece, were Tom’s passion. He smoked quantities
of them, and had the bad habit of inhaling the smoke,
breathing it slowly out again as he talked.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said. “As far as that goes, the garden of the
Kurhouse is alive with Hamburgers. Consul Fritsche, who
has bought it, is a Hamburger himself. He must be doing a
wonderful business now, Papa says. But you’ll miss something
if you don’t take part in it a bit. Peter Döhlmann is
there—he never stops in town this time of year. His business
goes on at a jog-trot, all by itself, I suppose. Funny! Well—and
Uncle Justus comes out for a little on a Sunday, of
course, to visit the roulette table. Then there are the Möllendorpfs
and the Kistenmakers, I suppose, in full strength, and
the Hagenströms—”</p>

<p>“H’m. Yes, of course. They couldn’t get on without
Sarah Semlinger!”</p>

<p>“Her name is Laura, my child. Let us be accurate.”</p>

<p>“And Julchen with her, of course. Julchen ought to get
engaged to August Möllendorpf this summer—and she will
do it, too. After all, they belong together. Disgusting,
isn’t it, Tom? This adventurer’s family—”</p>

<p>“Yes, but good heavens, they are the firm of Strunck and
Hagenström. That is the point.”</p>

<p>“Naturally, they make the firm. Of course. And everybody
knows <i>how</i> they do it. With their <i>elbows</i>. Pushing
and shoving—entirely without courtesy or elegance. Grandfather
said that Heinrich Hagenström could coin money out of
paving-stones. Those were his very words.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, that is exactly it. It is money talks. And this
match is perfectly good business. Julchen will be a Möllendorpf,
and August will get a snug position—”</p>

<p>“Oh, you just want to make me angry, Tom, that’s all. You
know how I despise that lot.”</p>

<p>Tom began to laugh. “Goodness, one has to get along with
them,” he replied. “As Papa said the other day, they are the
coming people; while the Möllendorpfs, for example— And
one can’t deny that the Hagenströms are clever. Hermann is
already useful in the business, and Moritz is very able. He
finished school brilliantly, in spite of his weak chest; and he
is going to study law.”</p>

<p>“That’s all very well, Tom, but all the same I am glad there
are families that don’t have to knuckle down to them. For
instance, we Buddenbrooks—”</p>

<p>“Oh,” Tom said, “don’t let’s begin to boast. Every family
has its own skeleton,” he went on in a lower voice, with a
glance at Jock’s broad back. “For instance, God knows what
state Uncle Julius’ affairs are in. Papa shakes his head when
he speaks of him, and Grandfather Kröger has had to come
forward once or twice with large sums, I hear. The cousins
aren’t just the thing, either. Jürgen wants to study, but he
still hasn’t come up for his finals; and they are not very well
satisfied with Jacob, at Dalbeck and Company. He is always
in debt, even with a good allowance, and when Uncle Justus refuses
to send any more, Aunt Rosalie does— No, I find it
doesn’t do to throw stones. If you want to balance the scale
with the Hagenströms, you’d better marry Grünlich.”</p>

<p>“Did we get into this wagon to discuss that subject?—Oh,
yes, I suppose you’re right. I ought to marry him—but I
won’t think about it now! I want to forget it. We are going
to the Schwarzkopfs’. I’ve never seen them to know them:
are they nice people?”</p>

<p>“Oh, old Diederich Schwarzkopf—he’s not such a bad old
chap. Doesn’t speak such atrocious dialect, unless he’s had
more than five glasses of grog. Once he was at the office, and
we went together to the Ships’ Company. He drank like a
tank. His father was born on a Norwegian freighter and
grew up to be captain on the very same line. Diederich has
had a good education; the pilot command is a responsible
office, and pretty well paid. Diederich is an old bear—but
very gallant with the ladies. Look out: he’ll flirt with you.”</p>

<p>“Ah—well, and his wife?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know her, myself. She must be nice, I should
think. There is a son, too. He was in first or second, in my
time at school, and is a student now, I expect. Look, there’s
the sea. We shall be there inside a quarter of an hour.”</p>

<p>They drove for a while along the shore on an avenue bordered
with young beech-trees. There was the water, blue and
peaceful in the sunshine; the round yellow light-house tower
came into view, then the bay and the breakwater, the red roofs
of the little town, the harbour with its sails, tackle, and shipping.
They drove between the first houses, passed the church,
and rolled along the front close to the water and up to a
pretty little house, the verandah of which was overhung with
vines.</p>

<p>Pilot-Captain Schwarzkopf stood before his door and took
off his seaman’s cap as the calèche drove up. He was a broad,
stocky man with a red face, sea-blue eyes, and a bristling
grizzled beard that ran fan-shaped from one ear to the other.
His mouth turned down at the corners, in one of which he
held a wooden pipe. His smooth-shaven, red upper lip was
hard and prominent; he looked thoroughly solid and respectable,
with big bones and well-rounded paunch; and he
wore a coat decorated with gold braid, underneath which a
white piqué waistcoat was visible.</p>

<p>“Servant, Mademoiselle,” he said, as he carefully lifted
Tony from the calèche. “We know it’s an honour you do us,
coming to stop with us like this. Servant, Herr Buddenbrook.
Papa well? And the honoured Frau Consul? Come in,
come in! My wife has some sort of a bite ready, I suppose.
Drive over to Peddersen’s Inn,” he said in his broadest dialect
to the coachman, who was carrying in the trunk. “You’ll
find they take good care of the horses there.” Then, turning
to Thomas, “you’ll stop the night with us, Herr Buddenbrook?
Oh, yes, you must. The horses want a bait and a rest, and
you wouldn’t get home until after dark.”</p>

<p>“Upon my word, one lives at least as well here as at the
Kurhouse,” Tony said a quarter of an hour later, as they
sat around the coffee-table in the verandah. “What wonderful
air! You can smell the sea-weed from here. How
frightfully glad I am to be in Travemünde again!”</p>

<p>Between the vine-clad columns of the verandah one could
look out on the broad river-mouths, glittering in the sun;
there were the piers and the boats, and the ferry-house on the
“Prival” opposite, the projecting peninsula of Mecklenburg.— The
clumsy, blue-bordered cups on the table were almost like
basins. How different from the delicate old porcelain at
home! But there was a bunch of flowers at Tony’s place,
the food looked inviting, and the drive had whetted her appetite.</p>

<p>“Yes, Mademoiselle will see, she will pick up here fast
enough,” the housewife said. “She looks a little poorly, if I
might say so. That is the town air, and the parties.”</p>

<p>Frau Schwarzkopf was the daughter of a Schlutup pastor.
She was a head shorter than Tony, rather thin, and looked to
be about fifty. Her hair was still black, and neatly dressed
in a large-meshed net. She wore a dark brown dress with
white crocheted collar and cuffs. She was spotless, gentle,
and hospitable, urging upon her guests the currant bread that
lay in a boat-shaped basket surrounded by cream, butter,
sugar, and honeycomb. This basket had a border of bead-work
embroidery, done by little Meta, the eight-year-old
daughter, who now sat next her mother, dressed in a plaid
frock, her flaxen hair in a thick pigtail.</p>

<p>Frau Schwarzkopf made excuses for Tony’s room, whither
she had already been to make herself tidy after the journey.
It was so very simple—</p>

<p>“Oh, all the better,” Tony said. It had a view of the
ocean, which was the main thing. And she dipped her fourth
piece of currant bread into her coffee. Tom talked with
the pilot-captain about the <i>Wullenwewer</i>, now undergoing repairs
in the town.</p>

<p>There came suddenly into the verandah a young man of
some twenty years. He took off his grey felt hat, blushed,
and bowed rather awkwardly.</p>

<p>“Well, my son,” said Herr Schwarzkopf, “you are late.”
He presented him to the guests: “This is my son, studying
to be a doctor. He is spending his vacation with us.” He
had mentioned the young man’s name, but Tony failed to
understand it.</p>

<p>“Pleased to meet you,” said Tony, primly. Tom rose and
shook hands. Young Schwarzkopf bowed again, put down
his book, and took his place at the table, blushing afresh.
He was of medium height, very slender, and as fair as he
could possibly be. His youthful moustaches, colourless as
the hair which covered his long head, were scarcely visible;
and he had a complexion to match, a tint like translucent
porcelain, which grew pink on the slightest provocation.
His eyes, slightly darker than his father’s, had the same not
very animated but good-natured quizzical expression; and his
features were regular and rather pleasing. When he began
to eat he displayed unusually regular teeth, glistening in
close ranks of polished ivory. For the rest, he wore a grey
jacket buttoned up, with flaps on the pockets, and an elastic
belt at the back.</p>

<p>“Yes, I am sorry I am late,” he said. His speech was
somewhat slow and grating. “I was reading on the beach, and
did not look soon enough at my watch.” Then he ate silently,
looking up now and then to glance at Tom and Tony.</p>

<p>Later on, Tony being again urged by the housewife to
take something, he said, “You can rely on the honey, Fräulein
Buddenbrook; it is a pure nature product—one knows what
one is eating. You must eat, you know. The air here consumes
one—it accelerates the process of metabolism. If you
do not eat well, you will get thin.” He had a pleasant, naïve,
way of now and then bending forward as he spoke and looking
at some other person than the one whom he addressed.</p>

<p>His mother listened to him tenderly and watched Tony’s
face to see the impression he made. But old Schwarzkopf
said, “Now, now, Herr Doctor. Don’t be blowing off about
your metabolism—<i>we</i> don’t know anything about that sort
of talk.” Whereupon the young man laughed, blushed again,
and looked at Tony’s plate.</p>

<p>The pilot-captain mentioned more than once his son’s Christian
name, but Tony could never quite catch what it was.
It sounded like Moor—or Mort; but the Father’s broad, flat
pronunciation was impossible to understand.</p>

<p>They finished their meal. Herr Diederich sat blinking in
the sun, his coat flung wide open over his white waistcoat,
and he and his son took out their short pipes. Tom smoked
his cigarettes, and the young people began a lively conversation,
the subject of which was their old school and all the old
school recollections. Tony took part gaily. They quoted
Herr Stengel: “What! You were to make a line, and what
are you making? A dash!” What a pity Christian was not
here! he could imitate him so much better.</p>

<p>Once Tom pointed to the flowers at Tony’s place and said
to his sister: “That trims things up uncommonly well, as
Herr Grünlich would say!” Whereat Tony, red with anger,
gave him a push and darted an embarrassed glance at young
Schwarzkopf.</p>

<p>The coffee-hour had been unusually late, and they had prolonged
it. It was already half-past six, and twilight was beginning
to descend over the Prival, when the captain got up.</p>

<p>“The company will excuse me,” he said; “I’ve some work
down at the pilot-house. We’ll have supper at eight o’clock,
if that suits the young folk. Or even a little later to-night,
eh, Meta? And you” (here he used his son’s name again),
“don’t be lolling about here. Just go and dig up your bones
again. Fräulein Buddenbrook will want to unpack. Or perhaps
the guests would like to go down on the beach. Only
don’t get in the way.”</p>

<p>“Diederich, for pity’s sake, why shouldn’t he sit still a
bit?” Frau Schwarzkopf said, with mild reproach. “And
if our guests like to go down on the beach, why shouldn’t he
go along? Is he to see nothing at all of our visitors?”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> her neat little room with the flower-covered furniture,
Tony woke next morning with the fresh, happy feeling which
one has at the beginning of a new chapter. She sat up in
bed and, with her hands clasped round her knees and her
tousled head flung back, blinked at the stream of light that
poured through the closed shutters into the room. She began
to sort out the experiences of the previous day.</p>

<p>Her thoughts scarcely touched upon the Grünlich affair.
The town, his hateful apparition in the landscape-room, the
exhortations of her family and Pastor Kölling—all that lay
far behind her. Here, every morning, there would be a
care-free waking. These Schwarzkopfs were splendid people.
Last night there had been pineapple punch, and they had
made part of a happy family circle. It had been very jolly.
Herr Schwarzkopf had told his best sea tales, and young
Schwarzkopf stories about student life at Göttingen. How
odd it was, that she still did not know his first name! And
she had strained her ear to hear too, but even at dinner she
did not succeed, and somehow it did not seem proper to ask.
She tried feverishly to think how it sounded—was it Moor—Mord—?
Anyhow, she had liked him pretty well, this young
Moor or Mord. He had such a sly, good-natured laugh when
he asked for the water and called it by letters and numbers,
so that his father got quite furious. But it was only the
scientific formula for water—that is, for ordinary water, for
the Travemünde product was a much more complicated affair,
of course. Why, one could find a jelly-fish in it, any time!
The authorities, of course, might have what notions they chose
about fresh water. For this he only got another scolding
from his father, for speaking slightingly of the authorities.
But Frau Schwarzkopf watched Tony all the time, to see how
much she admired the young man—and really, it was most
interesting, he was so learned and so jolly, all at the same
time. He had given her considerable attention. She had
complained that her head felt hot, while eating, and that
she must have too much blood. What had he replied? He
had given her a careful scrutiny, and then said, Yes, the
arteries in the temples might be full; but that did not prove
that she had too much blood. Perhaps, instead, it meant
she had too little—or rather, that there were too few red
corpuscles in it. In fact, she was perhaps a little anæmic.</p>

<p>The cuckoo sprang out of his carven house on the wall and
cuckooed several times, clear and loud. “Seven, eight, nine,”
counted Tony. “Up with you!” She jumped out of bed and
opened the blinds. The sky was partly overcast, but the sun
was visible. She looked out over the Leuchtenfeld with its
tower, to the ruffled sea beyond. On the right it was bounded
by the curve of the Mecklenburg coast; but before her it
stretched on and on till its blue and green streaks mingled
with the misty horizon. “I’ll bathe afterwards,” she thought,
“but first I’ll eat a big breakfast, so as not to be consumed
by my metabolism.” She washed and dressed with quick,
eager movements.</p>

<p>It was shortly after half-past nine when she left her room.
The door of the chamber in which Tom had slept stood
open; he had risen early and driven back to town. Even up
here in the upper storey, it smelled of coffee—that seemed
to be the characteristic odour of the little house, for it grew
stronger as she descended the simple staircase with its plain
board baluster and went down the corridor, where lay the
living-room, which was also the dining-room and the office of
the pilot-captain. She went out into the verandah, looking, in
her white piqué frock, perfectly fresh, and in the gayest of
tempers. Frau Schwarzkopf sat with her son at the table. It
was already partly cleared away, and the housewife wore
a blue-checked kitchen apron over her brown frock. A key-basket
stood beside her.</p>

<p>“A thousand pardons for not waiting,” she said, as she
stood up. “We simple folk rise early. There is so much
to be done! Schwarzkopf is in his office. I hope you don’t
take it ill?”</p>

<p>Tony excused herself in her turn. “You must not think
I always sleep so late as this,” she said. “I feel very guilty.
But the punch last night—”</p>

<p>The young man began to laugh. He stood behind the table
with his short pipe in his hand and a newspaper before him.</p>

<p>“Good morning,” Tony said. “Yes, it is your fault. You
kept urging me. Now I deserve only cold coffee. I ought
to have had breakfast and a bathe as well, by this time.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, that would be rather too early, for a young lady.
At seven o’clock the water was rather cold—eleven degrees.
That’s pretty sharp, after a warm bed.”</p>

<p>“How do you know I wanted a warm bath, monsieur?” and
Tony sat down beside Frau Schwarzkopf. “Oh, you have
kept the coffee hot for me, Frau Schwarzkopf! But I will
pour it out myself, thank you so much.”</p>

<p>The housewife looked on as her guest began to eat. “Fräulein
slept well, the first night? The mattress, dear knows,
is only stuffed with sea-weed—we are simple folk! And now,
good appetite, and a good morning. You will surely find
many friends on the beach. If you like, my son shall bear
you company. Pardon me for not sitting longer, but I must
look after the dinner. The joint is in the oven. We will
feed you as well as we can.”</p>

<p>“I shall stick to the honeycomb,” Tony said when the two
were alone. “You know what you are getting.”</p>

<p>Young Schwarzkopf laid his pipe on the verandah rail.</p>

<p>“But please smoke. I don’t mind it at all. At home,
when I come down to breakfast, Papa’s cigar-smoke is already
in the room. Tell me,” she said suddenly. “Is it true that
an egg is as good as a quarter of a pound of meat?”</p>

<p>He grew red all over. “Are you making fun of me?” he
asked, partly laughing but partly vexed. “I got another wigging
from my Father last night for what he calls my silly
professional airs.”</p>

<p>“No, really, I was asking because I wanted to know.”
Tony stopped eating in consternation. “How could anybody
call them airs? I should be so glad to learn something.
I’m such a goose, you see. At Sesemi Weichbrodt’s I was
always one of the very laziest. I’m sure you know a great
deal.” Inwardly her thoughts ran: “Everybody puts his best
foot foremost, before strangers. We all take care to say
what will be pleasant to hear—that is a commonplace....”</p>

<p>“Well, you see they are the same thing, in a way. The
chemical constituents of food-stuffs—” And so on, while
Tony breakfasted. Next they talked about Tony’s boarding-school
days, and Sesemi Weichbrodt, and Gerda Arnoldsen,
who had gone back to Amsterdam, and Armgard von Schelling,
whose home, a large white house, could be seen from the
beach here, at least in clear weather. Tony finished eating,
wiped her mouth, and asked, pointing to the paper, “Is there
any news?” Young Schwarzkopf shook his head and laughed
cynically.</p>

<p>“Oh, no. What would there be? You know these little
provincial news-sheets are wretched affairs.”</p>

<p>“Oh, are they? Papa and Mamma always take it in.”</p>

<p>He reddened again. “Oh, well, you see I always read it,
too. Because I can’t get anything else. But it is not very
thrilling to hear that So-and-So, the merchant prince, is about
to celebrate his silver wedding. Yes, you laugh. But you
ought to read other papers—the <i>Königsberg Gazette</i>, for instance,
or the <i>Rhenish Gazette</i>. You’d find a different story
there, entirely. There it’s what the King of Prussia says.”</p>

<p>“What does he say?”</p>

<p>“Well—er—I really couldn’t repeat it to a lady.” He got
red again. “He expressed himself rather strongly on the
subject of this same press,” he went on with another cynical
laugh, which, for a moment, made a painful impression on
Tony. “The press, you know, doesn’t feel any too friendly
toward the government or the nobility or the parsons and
junkers. It knows pretty well how to lead the censor by the
nose.”</p>

<p>“Well, and you? Aren’t you any too friendly with the
nobility, either?”</p>

<p>“I?” he asked, and looked very embarrassed. Tony rose.</p>

<p>“Shall we talk about this again another time?” she suggested.
“Suppose I go down to the beach now. Look, the
sky is blue nearly all over. It won’t rain any more. I am
simply longing to jump into the water. Will you go down
with me?”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">She</span> had put on her big straw hat, and she raised her sunshade;
for it was very hot, though there was a little seabreeze.
Young Schwarzkopf, in his grey felt, book in hand,
walked beside her and sometimes gave her a shy side-glance.
They went along the front and walked through the garden of
the Kurhouse, which lay there in the sun shadeless and still,
with its rose-bushes and pebbly paths. The music pavilion,
hidden among pine trees, stood opposite the Kurhouse, the
pastry-cook’s, and the two Swiss cottages, which were connected
by a long gallery. It was about half-past eleven, and
the hotel guests were probably down on the beach.</p>

<p>They crossed the playground, where there were many benches
and a large swing, passed close to the building where one
took the hot baths, and strolled slowly across the Leuchtenfeld.
The sun brooded over the grass, and there rose up
a spicy smell from the warm weeds and clover; blue-bottle
flies buzzed and droned about. A dull, booming roar came
up from the ocean, whose waters now and then lifted a crested
head of spray in the distance.</p>

<p>“What is that you are reading?” Tony asked. The young
man took the book in both hands and ran it quickly through,
from cover to cover.</p>

<p>“Oh, that is nothing for you, Fräulein Buddenbrook. Nothing
but blood and entrails and such awful things. This part
treats of nodes in the lungs. What we call pulmonary catarrh.
The lungs get filled up with a watery fluid. It is a
very dangerous condition, and occurs in inflammation of the
lungs. In bad cases, the patient simply chokes to death.
And that is all described with perfect coolness, from a scientific
point of view.”</p>

<p>“Oh, horrors! But if one wants to be a doctor—I will see
that you become our family physician, when old Grabow retires.
You’ll see!”</p>

<p>“Ha, ha! And what are you reading, if I may ask, Fräulein
Buddenbrook?”</p>

<p>“Do you know Hoffmann?” Tony asked.</p>

<p>“About the choir-master, and the gold pot? Yes, that’s
very pretty. But it is more for ladies. Men want something
different, you know.”</p>

<p>“I must ask you one thing,” Tony said, taking a sudden
resolution, after they had gone a few steps. “And that is, do,
I beg of you, tell me your first name. I haven’t been able
to understand it a single time I’ve heard it, and it is making
me dreadfully nervous. I’ve simply been racking my brains—I
have, quite.”</p>

<p>“You have been racking your brains?”</p>

<p>“Now don’t make it worse—I’m sure it couldn’t have been
proper for me to ask, only I’m naturally curious. There’s
really no reason whatever why I should know.”</p>

<p>“Why, my name is Morten,” said he, and became redder
than ever.</p>

<p>“Morten? That is a nice name.”</p>

<p>“Oh—<i>nice</i>!”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed. At least, it’s prettier than to be called something
like Hinz, or Kunz. It is unusual; it sounds foreign.”</p>

<p>“You are romantic, Fräulein Buddenbrook. You have read
too much Hoffmann. My grandfather was half Norwegian,
and I was named after him. That is all there is to it.”</p>

<p>Tony picked her way through the rushes on the edge of the
beach. In front of them was a row of round-topped wooden
pavilions, and beyond they could see the basket-chairs at the
water’s edge and people camped by families on the warm
sand—ladies with blue sun-spectacles and books out of the
loan-library; gentlemen in light suits idly drawing pictures
in the sand with their walking-sticks; sun-burnt children in
enormous straw hats, tumbling about, shovelling sand, digging
for water, baking with wooden moulds, paddling bare-legged
in the shallow pools, floating little ships. To the right, the
wooden bathing-pavilion ran out into the water.</p>

<p>“We are going straight across to Möllendorpf’s pier,” said
Tony. “Let’s turn off.”</p>

<p>“Certainly; but don’t you want to meet your friends?
I can sit down yonder on those boulders.”</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose I ought to just greet them. But I don’t
want to, you know. I came here to be in peace and quiet.”</p>

<p>“Peace? From what?”</p>

<p>“Why—from—from—”</p>

<p>“Listen, Fräulein Buddenbrook. I must ask you something.
No, I’ll wait till another day—till we have more time. Now
I will say au revoir and go and sit down there on the rocks.”</p>

<p>“Don’t you want me to introduce you, then?” Tony asked,
importantly.</p>

<p>“Oh, no,” Morten said, hastily. “Thanks, but I don’t fit
very well with those people, you see. I’ll just sit down over
there on the rocks.”</p>

<p>It was a rather large company which Tony was approaching
while Morten Schwarzkopf betook himself to the great heap
of boulders on the right, near to the bathing-house and
washed by the waves. The party was encamped before the
Möllendorpfs’ pier, and was composed of the Möllendorpf,
Hagenström, Kistenmaker, and Fritsche families. Except for
Herr Fritsche, the owner, from Hamburg, and Peter Döhlmann,
the idler, the group consisted of women, for it was
a week-day, and most of the men were in their offices. Consul
Fritsche, an elderly, smooth-shaven gentleman with a distinguished
face, was up on the open pier, busy with a telescope,
which he trained upon a sailboat visible in the distance.
Peter Döhlmann, with a broad-brimmed straw hat and a beard
with a nautical cut, stood chatting with the ladies perched
on camp-stools or stretched out on rugs on the sand. There
were Frau Senator Möllendorpf, born Langhals, with her long-handled
lorgnon and untidy grey hair; Frau Hagenström,
with Julchen, who had not grown much, but already wore
diamonds in her ears, like her mother; Frau Consul Kistenmaker
and her daughters; and Frau Consul Fritsche, a
wrinkled little lady in a cap, who performed the duties of
hospitality at the bath and went about perpetually hot and
tired, thinking only about balls and routs and raffles, children’s
parties and sailboat excursions. At a little distance
sat her paid companion.</p>

<p>Kistenmaker and Son was the new firm of wine-merchants
which had, in the last few years, managed to put C. F. Köppen
rather in the shade. The two sons, Edouard and Stephan,
worked in their father’s office. Consul Döhlmann possessed
none of those graces of manner upon which Justus Kröger laid
such stress. He was an idler pure and simple, whose special
characteristic was a sort of rough good humour. He could
and did take a good many liberties in society, being quite
aware that his loud, brusque voice and bluff ways caused the
ladies to set him down as an original. Once at a dinner at the
Buddenbrooks, when a course failed to come in promptly and
the guests grew dull and the hostess flustered, he came to the
rescue and put them into a good humour by bellowing in
his big voice the whole length of the table: “Please don’t
wait for me, Frau Consul!” Just now, in this same reverberating
voice, he was relating questionable anecdotes seasoned
with low-German idioms. Frau Senator Möllendorpf, in
paroxysms of laughter, was crying out over and over again:
“Stop, Herr Döhlmann, stop! for heaven’s sake, don’t tell
any more.”</p>

<p>They greeted Tony—the Hagenströms coldly, the others
with great cordiality. Consul Fritsche even came down the
steps of the pier, for he hoped that the Buddenbrooks would
return next year to swell the population of the baths.</p>

<p>“Yours to command, Fräulein Buddenbrook,” said Consul
Döhlmann, with his very best pronunciation; for he was aware
that Mademoiselle did not especially care for his manners.</p>

<p>“Mademoiselle Buddenbrook!”</p>

<p>“You here?”</p>

<p>“How lovely!”</p>

<p>“When did you come?”</p>

<p>“What a sweet frock!”</p>

<p>“Where are you stopping?”</p>

<p>“At the Schwarzkopfs’?”</p>

<p>“With the pilot-captain? How original!”</p>

<p>“How <i>frightfully</i> original.”</p>

<p>“You are stopping in the town?” asked Consul Fritsche,
the owner of the baths. He did not betray that he felt the
blow.</p>

<p>“Will you come to our next assembly?” his wife asked.</p>

<p>“Oh, you are only here for a short time?”—this from
another lady.</p>

<p>“Don’t you think, darling, the Buddenbrooks rather give
themselves airs?” Frau Hagenström whispered to Frau Senator
Möllendorpf.</p>

<p>“Have you been in yet?” somebody asked. “Which of the
rest of you hasn’t bathed yet, young ladies? Marie? Julie,
Louise? Your friends will go bathing with you, of course,
Fräulein Antonie.” Some of the young girls rose, and Peter
Döhlmann insisted on accompanying them up the beach.</p>

<p>“Do you remember how we used to go back and forth to
school together?” Tony asked Julie Hagenström.</p>

<p>“Yes, and you were always the one that got into mischief,”
Julie said, joining in her laugh. They went across the beach
on a foot-bridge made of a few boards, and reached the bathhouse.
As they passed the boulders where Morten Schwarzkopf
sat, Tony nodded to him from a distance, and somebody
asked, “who is that you are bowing to, Tony?”</p>

<p>“That was young Schwarzkopf,” Tony answered. “He
walked down here with me.”</p>

<p>“The son of the pilot-captain?” Julchen asked, and peered
across at Morten with her staring black eyes. He on his
side watched the gay troop with rather a melancholy air.
Tony said in a loud voice: “What a pity August is not
here. It must be stupid on the beach.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">And</span> now began for Tony Buddenbrook a stretch of beautiful
summer weeks, briefer, lovelier, than any she had ever spent
in Travemünde. She bloomed as she felt her burden no
longer upon her; her gay, pert, careless manner had come
back. The Consul looked at her with satisfaction when he
came on Sundays with Tom and Christian. On those days
they ate at the table-d’hôte, sat under the awnings at the
pastry-cook’s, drinking coffee and listening to the band, and
peeped into the roulette-room at the gay folk there, like Justus
Kröger and Peter Döhlmann. The Consul himself never
played. Tony sunned herself, took baths, ate sausages with
ginger-nut sauce, and took long walks with Morten. They
went out on the high-road to the next village, or along the
beach to the “ocean temple” on its height, whence a wide
view was to be had over land and sea; or to the woods behind
the Kurhouse, where was a great bell used to call the
guests to the table-d’hôte. Sometimes they rowed across the
Trave to the Prival, to look for amber.</p>

<p>Morten made an entertaining companion, though his
opinions were often dogmatic, not to say heated. He had a
severe and righteous judgment for everything, and he expressed
it with finality, blushing all the time. It saddened
Tony to hear him call the nobility idiots and wretches and
to see the contemptuous if awkward gesture that accompanied
the words. She scolded him, but she was proud to have
him express so freely in her presence the views and opinions
which she knew he concealed from his parents. Once he
confided in her: “I’ll tell you something: I’ve a skeleton
in my room at Göttingen—a whole set of bones, you know,
held together by wire. I’ve put an old policeman’s uniform
on it. Ha, ha! Isn’t that great? But don’t say anything to
my Father about it.”</p>

<p>Tony was naturally often in the society of her town friends,
or drawn into some assembly or boating party. Then Morten
“sat on the rocks.” And after their first day this phrase
became a convenient one. To “sit on the rocks” meant to
feel bored and lonely. When a rainy day came and a grey
mist covered the sea far and wide till it was one with the
deep sky; when the beach was drenched and the roads streaming
with wet, Tony would say: “To-day we shall both have
to sit on the rocks—that is, in the verandah or sitting-room.
There is nothing left to do but for you to play me some
of your student songs, Morten—even if they do bore me
horribly.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Morten said, “come and sit down. But you know
that when you are here, there are no rocks!” He never
said such things when his father was present. His mother
he did not mind.</p>

<p>“Well, what now?” asked the pilot-captain, as Tony and
Morten both rose from table and were about to take their
leave. “Where are the young folk off to?”</p>

<p>“I was going to take a little walk with Fräulein Antonie,
as far as the temple.”</p>

<p>“Oh, is that it? Well, my son Filius, what do you say to
going up to your room and conning over your nerves? You’ll
lose everything out of your head before you get back to Göttingen.”</p>

<p>But Frau Schwarzkopf would intervene: “Now, Diederich,
aren’t these his holidays? Why shouldn’t he take a walk?
Is he to have nothing of our visitor?” So Morten went.</p>

<p>They paced along the beach close to the water, on the
smooth, hard sand that made walking easy. It was strewn
with common tiny white mussel-shells, and others too, pale
opalescent and longish in shape; yellow-green wet sea-weed
with hollow round fruit that snapped when you squeezed it;
and pale, translucent, reddish-yellow jelly-fish, which were
poisonous and burned your leg when you touched one
bathing.</p>

<p>“I used to be frightfully stupid, you know,” Tony said.
“I wanted the bright star out of the jelly-fish, so I brought a
lot home in my pocket-handkerchief and put them on the
balcony, to dry in the sunshine. When I looked at them
again, of course there was just a big wet spot that smelled
of sea-weed.”</p>

<p>The waves whispered rhythmically beside them as they
walked, and the salt wind blew full in their faces, streaming
over and about them, closing their ears to other sounds and
causing a pleasant slight giddiness. They walked in this
hushed, whispering peacefulness by the sea, whose every faint
murmur, near or far, seemed to have a deep significance.</p>

<p>To their left was a precipitous cliff of lime and boulders,
with jutting corners that came into view as they rounded the
bay. When the beach was too stony to go on, they began
to climb, and continued upward through the wood until they
reached the temple. It was a round pavilion, built of rough
timbers and boards, the inside of which was covered with
scribbled inscriptions and poetry, carved hearts and initials.
Tony and Morten seated themselves in one of the little rooms
facing the sea; it smelled of wood, like the cabins at the
bathhouse. It was very quiet, even solemn, up here at this
hour of the afternoon. A pair of birds chattered, and the
faint rustling of the leaves mingled with the sound of the sea
spread out below them. In the distance they could see the
rigging of a ship. Sheltered now from the wind that had
been thrumming at their ears, they suddenly experienced a
quiet, almost pensive mood.</p>

<p>Tony said, “Is it coming or going?”</p>

<p>“What?” asked Morten, his subdued voice sounding as if
he were coming back from a far distance. “Oh—going— That
is the <i>Burgermeister Steenbock</i>, for Russia.” He added
after a pause: “I shouldn’t like to be going with it. It must
be worse there than here.”</p>

<p>“Now,” Tony said, “you are going to begin again on the
nobility. I see it in your face. And it’s not at all nice of
you. Tell me, did you ever know a single one of them?”</p>

<p>“No!” Morten shouted, quite insulted. “Thank God, no.”</p>

<p>“Well, there, then, I have—Armgard von Schilling over
there, that I told you about. She was much better-natured
than either of us; she hardly knew she was a <i>von</i>—she ate
sausage-meat and talked about her cows.”</p>

<p>“Oh, of course. There are naturally exceptions. Listen,
Fräulein Tony. You are a woman, you see, so you take
everything personally. You happen to know a single member
of the nobility, and you say she is a good creature—certainly!
But one does not need to know any of them to be
able to judge them all. It is a question of the principle,
you understand—of—the organization of the state. You can’t
answer that, can you? They need only to be born to be the
pick of everything, and look down on all the rest of us.
While we, however hard we strive, cannot climb to their level.”
Morten spoke with a naïve, honest irritation. He tried to
fit his speech with gestures, then perceived that they were
awkward, and gave it up. But he was in the vein to talk, and
he went on, sitting bent forward, with his thumb between the
buttons of his jacket, a defiant expression in his usually good-natured
eyes. “We, the bourgeoisie—the Third Estate, as we
have been called—we recognize only that nobility which consists
of merit; we refuse to admit any longer the rights of
the indolent aristocracy, we repudiate the class distinctions
of the present day, we desire that all men should be free and
equal, that no person shall be subject to another, but all
subject to the law. There shall be no more privilege and
arbitrary rule. All shall be sovereign children of the state;
and as no middlemen exist any longer between the people and
almighty God, so shall the citizen stand in direct relation to
the State. We will have freedom of the press, of trade and
industry, so that all men, without distinction, shall be able
to strive together and receive their reward according to their
merit. We are enslaved, muzzled!—What was it I wanted to
say? Oh, yes! Four years ago they renewed the laws of the
Confederation touching the universities and the press. Fine
laws they are! No truth may be written or taught which
might not agree with the established order of things. Do you
understand? The truth is suppressed—forbidden to be
spoken. Why? For the sake of an obsolete, idiotic, decadent
class which everybody knows will be destroyed some day, anyhow.
I do not think you can comprehend such meanness.
It is the stupid, brutal application of force, the immediate
physical strength of the police, without the slightest understanding
of new, spiritual forces. And apart from all that,
there is the final fact of the great wrong the King of Prussia
has done us. In 1813, when the French were in the
country, he called us together and promised us a Constitution.
We came to the rescue, we freed Germany from the invader—”</p>

<p>Tony, chin in hand, stole a look at him and wondered for
a moment if he could have actually helped to drive out
Napoleon.</p>

<p>“—but do you think he kept his promise? Oh, no! The
present king is a fine orator, a dreamer; a romantic, like
you, Fräulein Tony. But I’ll tell you something: take any
general principle or conception of life. It always happens
that, directly it has been found wanting and discarded by
the poets and philosophers, there comes along a King to
whom it is a perfectly new idea, and who makes it a guiding
principle. That is what kings are like. It is not only that
kings are men—they are even very distinctly average men;
they are always a good way in the rear. Oh, yes, Germany
is just like a students’ society; it had its brave and spirited
youth at the time of the great revolution, but now it is just a
lot of fretful Philistines.”</p>

<p>“Ye—es,” Tony said. “But let me ask you this: Why
are you so interested in Prussia? You aren’t a Prussian.”</p>

<p>“Oh, it is all the same thing, Fräulein Buddenbrook. Yes,
I said Fräulein Buddenbrook on purpose, I ought even to
have said Demoiselle Buddenbrook, and given you your entire
title. Are the men here freer, more brotherly, more equal
than in Prussia? Conventions, classes, aristocracy, here as
there. You have sympathy for the nobility. Shall I tell you
why? Because you belong to it yourself. Yes, yes, didn’t
you know it? Your father is a great gentleman, and you are
a princess. There is a gulf between you and us, because we
do not belong to your circle of ruling families. You can
walk on the beach with one of us for the sake of your health,
but when you get back into your own class, then the rest of
us can go and sit on the rocks.” His voice had grown quite
strangely excited.</p>

<p>“Morten,” said Tony, sadly. “You have been angry all
the time, then, when you were sitting on the rocks! And I
always begged you to come and be introduced.”</p>

<p>“Now you are taking the affair personally again, like a
young lady, Fräulein Tony, I’m only speaking of the principle.
I say that there is no more fellowship of humanity
with us than in Prussia.—And even if I were speaking personally,”
he went on, after a little pause, with a softer tone,
out of which, however, the strange excitement had not disappeared,
“I shouldn’t be speaking of the present, but rather,
perhaps, of the future. When you as Madame So-and-So
finally vanish into your proper sphere, one is left to sit on
the rocks all the rest of one’s life.”</p>

<p>He was silent, and Tony too. She did not look at him,
but in the other direction, at the wooden partition. There
was an uneasy stillness for some time.</p>

<p>“Do you remember,” Morten began again, “I once said to
you that there was a question I wanted to ask you? Yes, I
have wanted to know, since the first afternoon you came.
Don’t guess. You couldn’t guess what I mean. I am going
to ask you another time; there is no hurry; it has really
nothing to do with me; it is only curiosity. No, to-day I
will only show you one thing. Look.” He drew out of the
pocket of his jacket the end of a narrow gaily-striped ribbon,
and looked with a mixture of expectation and triumph
into Tony’s eyes.</p>

<p>“How pretty,” she said uncomprehendingly. “What is it?”</p>

<p>Morten spoke solemnly: “That means that I belong to
a students’ fraternity in Göttingen.—Now you know. I have
a cap in the same colours, but my skeleton in the policeman’s
uniform is wearing it for the holidays. I couldn’t be seen
with it here, you understand. I can count on your saying
nothing, can’t I? Because it would be very unfortunate if
my father were to hear of it.”</p>

<p>“Not a word, Morten. You can rely on me. But I don’t
understand—have you all taken a vow against the nobility?
What is it you want?”</p>

<p>“We want freedom,” Morten said.</p>

<p>“Freedom?” she asked.</p>

<p>“Yes, freedom, you know—<i>Freedom!</i>” he repeated; and
he made a vague, awkward, fervent gesture outward and downward,
not toward the side where the coast of Mecklenburg
narrowed the bay, but in the direction of the open sea, whose
rippling blue, green, yellow, and grey stripes rolled as far
as eye could see out to the misty horizon.</p>

<p>Tony followed his gesture with her eye; they sat, their
hands lying close together on the bench, and looked into
the distance. Thus they remained in silence a long time,
while the sea sent up to them its soft enchanting whispers....
Tony suddenly felt herself one with Morten in a
great, vague yearning comprehension of this portentous something
which he called “Freedom.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">It</span> is wonderful how one doesn’t get bored, here at the seashore,
Morten. Imagine lying anywhere else for hours at a
time, flat on your back, doing nothing, not even thinking—”</p>

<p>“Yes. But I must confess that I used to be bored sometimes—only
not in the last few weeks.”</p>

<p>Autumn was at hand. The first strong wind had risen.
Thin, tattered grey clouds raced across the sky. The dreary,
tossing sea was covered far and wide with foam. Great,
powerful waves rolled silently in, relentless, awesome; towered
majestically, in a metallic dark-green curve, then crashed
thundering on the sand.</p>

<p>The season was quite at an end. On that part of the beach
usually occupied by the throng of bathers, the pavilions were
already partly dismantled, and it lay as quiet as the grave,
with only a very few basket-chairs. But Tony and Morten
spent the afternoon in a distant spot, at the edge of the
yellow loam, where the waves hurled their spray as far up
as Sea-gull Rock. Morten had made her a solid sand fortress,
and she leaned against it with her back, her feet in their
strap shoes and white stockings crossed in front of her.
Morten lay turned toward her, his chin in his hands. Now
and then a sea-gull flew past them, shrieking. They looked at
the green wall of wave, streaked with sea-weed, that came
threateningly on and on and then broke against the opposing
boulders, with the eternal, confused tumult that deafens and
silences and destroys all sense of time.</p>

<p>Finally Morten made a movement as though rousing himself
from deep thought, and said, “Well, you will soon be
leaving us, Fräulein Tony.”</p>

<p>“No; why?” Tony said absently.</p>

<p>“Well, it is the tenth of September. My holidays are
nearly at an end, anyhow. How much longer can it last?
Shall you be glad to get back to the society of your own
kind? Tell me—I suppose the gentlemen you dance with
are very agreeable?—No, no, that was not what I wanted
to say. Now you must answer me,” he said, with a sudden
resolution, shifting his chin in his hands and looking at her.
“Here is the question I have been waiting so long to ask.
Now: who is Herr Grünlich?”</p>

<p>Tony sat up, looking at him quickly, her eyes shifting back
and forth like those of a person recollecting himself on coming
out of a dream. She was feeling again the sense of increased
personal importance first experienced when Herr
Grünlich proposed for her hand.</p>

<p>“Oh, is that what you want to know, Morten?” she said
weightily. “Well, I will tell you. It was really very painful
for me to have Thomas mention his name like that, the first
afternoon; but since you have already heard of him—well,
Herr Grünlich, Bendix Grünlich, is a business friend of my
father, a well-to-do Hamburg merchant, who has asked for my
hand. No, no,” she replied quickly to a movement of Morten’s,
“I have refused him; I have never been able to make
up my mind to yield him my consent for life.”</p>

<p>“And why not?—if I may ask,” said Morten awkwardly.</p>

<p>“Why? Oh, good heavens, because I couldn’t endure him,”
she cried out in a passion. “You ought to have seen him,
how he looked and how he acted. Among other things, he
had yellow whiskers—dreadfully unnatural. I’m sure he
curled them and put on gold powder, like the stuff we use for
the Christmas nuts. And he was underhanded. He fawned
on my Father and Mother and chimed in with them in the
most shameful way—”</p>

<p>Morten interrupted her. “But what does this mean: ‘That
trims it up uncommonly.’”</p>

<p>Tony broke into a nervous giggle.</p>

<p>“Well, he talked like that, Morten. He wouldn’t say ‘That
looks very well’ or ‘It goes very well with the room.’ He was
frightfully silly, I tell you. And very persistent; he simply
wouldn’t be put off, although I never gave him anything but
sarcasm. Once he made such a scene—he nearly wept—imagine
a man weeping!”</p>

<p>“He must have worshipped you,” Morten said softly.</p>

<p>“Well, what affair was that of mine?” she cried out, astonished,
turning around on her sand-heap.</p>

<p>“You are cruel, Fräulein Tony. Are you always cruel?
Tell me: You didn’t like this Herr Grünlich. But is there
any one to whom you have been more gracious? Sometimes
I think: Has she a cold heart? Let me tell you something:
a man is not idiotic simply because he weeps when you
won’t look at him. I swear it. I am not sure, not at all,
that I wouldn’t do the same thing. You see, you are such a
dainty, spoilt thing. Do you always make fun of people
that lie at your feet? Have you really a cold heart?”</p>

<p>After the first giggle, Tony’s lip began to quiver. She
turned on him a pair of great distressed eyes, which slowly
filled with tears as she said softly: “No, Morten, you should
not think that of me—you must not think that of me.”</p>

<p>“I don’t; indeed I don’t,” he cried, with a laugh of mingled
emotion and hardly suppressed exultation. He turned fully
about, so that he lay supporting himself on his elbows, took
her hands in both his, and looked straight into hers with his
kind steel-blue eyes, which were excited and dreamy and exalted
all at once.</p>

<p>“Then you—you won’t mock at me if I tell you—?”</p>

<p>“I know, Morten,” she answered gently, looking away from
him at the fine white sand sifting through the fingers of her
free hand.</p>

<p>“You know—and you—oh, Fräulein Tony!”</p>

<p>“Yes, Morten. I care a great deal for you. More than for
any one else I know.”</p>

<p>He started up, making awkward gestures with his arms,
like a man bewildered. Then he got to his feet, only to
throw himself down again by her side and cry in a voice
that stammered, wavered, died away and rose again, out of
sheer joy: “Oh, thank you, thank you! I am so happy!
more than I ever was in all my life!” And he fell to kissing
her hands. After a moment he said more quietly; “You
will be going back to town soon, Tony, and my holidays
will be over in two weeks; then I must return to Göttingen.
But will you promise me that you will never forget this afternoon
here on the beach—till I come back again with my degree,
and can ask your Father—however hard that’s going
to be? And you won’t listen to any Herr Grünlich meantime?
Oh, it won’t be so long—I will work like a—like anything!
it will be so easy!”</p>

<p>“Yes, Morten,” she said dreamily, looking at his eyes, his
mouth, his hands holding hers.</p>

<p>He drew her hand close to his breast and asked very softly
and imploringly: “And won’t you—may I—seal the promise?”</p>

<p>She did not answer, she did not look at him, but moved
nearer to him on the sand-heap, and Morten kissed her
slowly and solemnly on the mouth. Then they stared in
different directions across the sand, and both felt furiously
embarrassed.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER X</h3>
</div>

<div class="blockquot">

<p><span class="smcap">Dearest Mademoiselle Buddenbrook</span>,</p>

<p>For how long must the undersigned exist without a glimpse
of his enchantress? These few lines will tell you that the
vision has never ceased to hover before his spiritual eye; that
never has he during these interminably anxious months ceased
to think of the precious afternoon in your parental salon,
when you let fall a blushing promise which filled me with
bliss unspeakable! Since then long weeks have flown, during
which you have retired from the world for the sake of
calm and self-examination. May I now hope that the period
of probation is past? The undersigned permits himself, dearest
Mademoiselle, to send the enclosed ring as an earnest of
his undying tenderness. With the most tender compliments,
and devotedly kissing your hand, I remain,</p>

<p class="right"><span class="indentright">Your obedient servant,</span><br/>
<span class="smcap">Grünlich</span>.</p>

<hr class="tiny"/>

<p><span class="smcap">Dear Papa</span>,</p>

<p>How angry I’ve been! I had the enclosed letter and ring
just now from Grünlich, and my head aches fearfully from
excitement. I don’t know what else to do but send them
both to you. He simply will not understand me, and what
he so poetically writes about the promise isn’t in the least
true, and I beg you emphatically to make it immediately
perfectly clear to him that I am a thousand times less able
to say yes to him than I was before, and that he must leave me
in peace. He makes himself ridiculous. To you, my dearest
Father, I can say that I have bound myself elsewhere, to
one who adores me and whom I love more than I can say.
Oh, Papa! I could write pages to you! I mean Herr Morten
Schwarzkopf, who is studying to be a physician, and who as
soon as that happens will ask for my hand. I know that it
is the rule of the family to marry a business man, but Morten
belongs to the other section of respectable men, the scholars.
He is not rich, which I know is important to you and Mamma:
but I must tell you that, young as I am, I have learned that
riches do not make every one happy. With a thousand kisses,</p>

<p class="right"><span class="indentright">Your obedient daughter,</span><br/>
<span class="smcap">Antonie</span>.</p>

<p>P.S. I find the ring very poor gold, and too narrow.</p>

<hr class="tiny"/>

<p><span class="smcap">My dear Tony</span>,</p>

<p>Your letter duly received. As regards its contents, I must
tell you that I did not fail to communicate them to Herr
Grünlich: the result was of such a nature as to shock me very
much. You are a grown girl, and at a serious time of life,
so I need not scruple to tell you the consequences that a
frivolous step of yours may draw after it. Herr Grünlich,
then, burst into despair at my announcement, declaring that
he loved you so dearly, and could so little console himself
for your loss, that he would be in a state to take his own
life if you remain firm in your resolve. As I cannot take
seriously what you write me of another attachment, I must
beg you to master your excitement over the ring, and consider
everything again very carefully. It is my Christian conviction,
my dear daughter, that one must have regard for the
feelings of others. We do not know that you may not be
made responsible by the most high Judge if a man whose
feelings you have coldly and obstinately scorned should trespass
against his own life. But the thing I have so often told
you by word of mouth, I must recall again to your remembrance,
and I am glad to have the occasion to repeat it in
writing; for though speech is more vivid and has the more
immediate effect, the written word has the advantage that it
can be chosen with pains and fixed in a form well-weighed
and calculated by the writer, to be read over and over again,
with proportionate effect.—My child, we are not born for
that which, with our short-sighted vision, we reckon to be
our own small personal happiness. We are not free, separate,
and independent entities, but like links in a chain, and
we could not by any means be what we are without those who
went before us and showed us the way, by following the
straight and narrow path, not looking to right or left. Your
path, it seems to me, has lain all these weeks sharply marked
out for you, and you would not be my daughter, nor the
granddaughter of your Grandfather who rests in God, nor a
worthy member of our own family, if you really have it in
your heart, alone, wilfully, and light-headedly to choose your
own unregulated path. Your Mother, Thomas, Christian,
and I beg you, my dear Antonie, to weigh all this in your
heart. Mlle. Jungmann and Clara greet you affectionately,
likewise Clothilde, who has been the last several weeks with
her father at Thankless. We all rejoice at the thought of embracing
you once more.</p>

<p class="right"><span class="indentright">With unfailing affection,</span><br/>
<span class="smcap">Your loving Father</span>.</p>
</div>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">It</span> rained in streams. Heaven, earth, and sea were in flood,
while the driving wind took the rain and flung it against
the panes as though not drops but brooks were flowing down
and making them impossible to see through. Complaining
and despairing voices sounded in the chimney.</p>

<p>When Morten Schwarzkopf went out into the verandah with
his pipe shortly after dinner to look at the sky, he found there
a gentleman with a long, narrow yellow-checked ulster and a
grey hat. A closed carriage, its top glistening with wet, its
wheels clogged with mud, was before the door. Morten stared
irresolutely into the rosy face of the gentleman. He had
mutton-chop whiskers that looked as though they had been
dressed with gold paint.</p>

<p>The gentleman in the ulster looked at Morten as one looks
at a servant, blinking gently without seeing him, and said in
a soft voice: “Is Herr Pilot-Captain Schwarzkopf at home?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” stammered Morten, “I think my Father—”</p>

<p>Hereupon the gentleman fixed his eyes upon him; they
were as blue as a goose’s.</p>

<p>“Are you Herr Morten Schwarzkopf?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” answered Morten, trying to keep his face straight.</p>

<p>“Ah—indeed!” remarked the gentleman in the ulster, and
went on, “Have the goodness to announce me to your Father,
young man. My name is Grünlich.”</p>

<p>Morten led the gentleman through the verandah, opened
for him the right-hand door that led into the office, and went
back into the sitting-room to tell his Father. Then the youth
sat down at the round table, resting his elbow on it, and
seemed, without noticing his Mother, who was sitting at the
dark window mending stockings, to busy himself with the
“wretched news-sheet” which had nothing in it except the announcements
of the silver wedding of Consul So-and-So.
Tony was resting in her room.</p>

<p>The pilot-captain entered his office with the air of a man
satisfied with his meal. His uniform-coat stood open over
the usual white waistcoat. His face was red, and his ice-grey
beard coldly set off against it; his tongue travelled about
agreeably among his teeth, making his good mouth take the
most extraordinary shapes. He bowed shortly, jerkily, with
the air of one conforming to the conventions as he understood
them.</p>

<p>“Good afternoon,” he said. “At your service.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich, on his side, bowed with deliberation, although
one corner of his mouth seemed to go down. He said
softly: “Ahem!”</p>

<p>The office was rather a small room, the walls of which had
wainscoting for a few feet and then simple plaster. Curtains,
yellow with smoke, hung before the window, on whose panes
the rain beat unceasingly. On the right of the door was a
rough table covered with papers, above it a large map of
Europe, and a smaller one of the Baltic Sea fastened to the
wall. From the middle of the ceiling hung the well-cut model
of a ship under full sail.</p>

<p>The Captain made his guest take the sloping sofa, covered
with cracked oil-cloth, that stood opposite the door, and made
himself comfortable in a wooden arm-chair, folding his hands
across his stomach; while Herr Grünlich, his ulster tightly
buttoned up, his hat on his knees, sat bolt upright on the
edge of the sofa.</p>

<p>“My name is, I repeat, Grünlich,” he said; “from Hamburg.
I may say by way of introduction that I am a close business
friend of Herr Buddenbrook.”</p>

<p>“Servant, Herr Grünlich; pleased to make your acquaintance.
Won’t you make yourself comfortable? Have a glass
of grog after your journey? I’ll send right into the kitchen.”</p>

<p>“I must permit myself to remark that my time is limited,
my carriage is waiting, and I am really obliged to ask for
the favour of a few words with you.”</p>

<p>“At your service,” repeated Herr Schwarzkopf, taken aback.
There was a pause.</p>

<p>“Herr Captain,” began Herr Grünlich, wagging his head
with determination and throwing himself back on his seat.
After this he was silent again; and by way of enhancing the
effect of his address he shut his mouth tight, like a purse
drawn together with strings.</p>

<p>“Herr Captain,” he repeated, and went on without further
pause, “The matter about which I have come to you directly
concerns the young lady who has been for some weeks stopping
in your house.”</p>

<p>“Mademoiselle Buddenbrook?” asked the Consul.</p>

<p>“Precisely,” assented Herr Grünlich. He looked down at
the floor, and spoke in a voice devoid of expression. Hard
lines came out at the corners of his mouth.</p>

<p>“I am obliged to inform you,” he went on in a sing-song
tone, his sharp eyes jumping from one point in the room to
another and then to the window, “that some time ago I proposed
for the hand of Mademoiselle Buddenbrook. I am
in possession of the fullest confidence of both parents, and
the young lady herself has unmistakably given me a
claim to her hand, though no betrothal has taken place in
form.”</p>

<p>“You don’t say—God keep us!” said Herr Schwarzkopf, in
a sprightly tone. “I never heard that before! Congratulations,
Herr—er—Grünlich. She’s a good girl—genuine good
stuff.”</p>

<p>“Thank you for the compliment,” said Herr Grünlich,
coldly. He went on in his high sing-song: “What brings me
to you on this occasion, my good Herr Captain, is the circumstance
that certain difficulties have just arisen—and these difficulties—appear
to have their source in your house—?” He
spoke the last words in a questioning tone, as if to say, “Can
this disgraceful state of things be true, or have my ears deceived
me?”</p>

<p>Herr Schwarzkopf answered only by lifting his eyebrows
as high as they would go, and clutching the arms of his chair
with his brown, blond-felled fisherman’s hands.</p>

<p>“Yes. This is the fact. So I am informed,” Herr Grünlich
said, with dreary certitude. “I hear that your son—<i>studiosus
medicinae</i>, I am led to understand—has allowed himself—of
course unconsciously—to encroach upon my rights.
I hear that he has taken advantage of the present visit of the
young lady to extract certain promises from her.”</p>

<p>“What?” shouted the pilot-captain, gripping the arms of his
chair and springing up. “That we shall soon—we can soon
see—!” With two steps he was at the door, tore it open, and
shouted down the corridor in a voice that would have out-roared
the wildest seas: “Meta, Morten! Come in here, both
of you.”</p>

<p>“I shall regret it exceedingly if the assertion of my prior
rights runs counter to your fatherly hopes, Herr Captain.”</p>

<p>Diederich Schwarzkopf turned and stared, with his sharp blue
eyes in their wrinkled setting, straight into the stranger’s face,
as though he strove in vain to comprehend his words.</p>

<p>“Sir!” he said. Then, with a voice that sounded as though
he had just burnt his throat with hot grog, “I’m a simple sort
of a man, and don’t know much about landlubber’s tricks and
skin games; but if you mean, maybe, that—well, sir, you can
just set it down right away that you’ve got on the wrong tack,
and are making a pretty bad miscalculation about my fatherly
hopes. I know who my son is, and I know who Mademoiselle
Buddenbrook is, and there’s too much respect and too much
pride in my carcase to be making any plans of the sort you’ve
mentioned.—And now,” he roared, jerking his head toward
the door, “it’s your turn to talk, boy. You tell me what this
affair is; what is this I hear—hey?”</p>

<p>Frau Schwarzkopf and her son stood in the doorway, she
innocently arranging her apron, he with the air of a hardened
sinner. Herr Grünlich did not rise at their entrance. He
waited, erect and composed, on the edge of the sofa, buttoned
up tight in his ulster.</p>

<p>“So you’ve been behaving like a silly fool?” bellowed the
captain to Morten.</p>

<p>The young man had his thumb stuck between the buttons
of his jacket. He scowled and puffed out his cheeks defiantly.</p>

<p>“Yes, Father,” he said, “Fräulein Buddenbrook and I—”</p>

<p>“Well, then, I’ll just tell you you’re a perfect Tom-fool, a
young ninny, and you’ll be packed off to-morrow for Göttingen—to-morrow,
understand? It’s all damned childish nonsense,
and rascality into the bargain.”</p>

<p>“Good heavens, Diederich,” said Frau Schwarzkopf, folding
her hands, “you can’t just say that, you know. Who
knows—?” She stopped, she said no more; but it was plain
from her face that a mother’s beautiful dream had been shattered
in that moment.</p>

<p>“Would the gentleman like to see the young lady?” Schwarzkopf
turned to Herr Grünlich and spoke in a harsh voice.</p>

<p>“She is upstairs in her room asleep,” Frau Schwarzkopf said
with feeling.</p>

<p>“I regret,” said Herr Grünlich, and he got up, obviously
relieved. “But I repeat that my time is limited, and the carriage
waits. I permit myself,” he went on, describing with
his hat a motion in the direction of Herr Schwarzkopf, “to
acknowledge to you, Herr Captain, my entire recognition of
your manly and high-principled bearing. I salute you.
Good-bye.”</p>

<p>Diederich Schwarzkopf did not offer to shake hands with
him. He merely gave a jerky bow with the upper part of his
heavy figure, that had an air of saying: “This is the proper
thing, I suppose.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich, with measured tread, passed between Morten
and his mother and went out the door.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Thomas</span> appeared with the Kröger calèche. The day was at
hand.</p>

<p>The young man arrived at ten o’clock in the forenoon and
took a bite with the family in the living-room. They sat
together as on the first day, except that now summer was over;
it was too cold and windy to sit in the verandah; and—Morten
was not there. He was in Göttingen. Tony and he had not
even been able to say good-bye. The Captain had stood there
and said, “Well, so that’s the end of that, eh!”</p>

<p>At eleven the brother and sister mounted into the wagon,
where Tony’s trunk was already fastened at the back. She
was pale and shivered in her soft autumn coat—from
cold, weariness, excitement, and a grief that now and then
rose up suddenly and filled her breast with a painful oppression.
She kissed little Meta, pressed the house-wife’s hand,
and nodded to Herr Schwarzkopf when he said, “Well, you
won’t forget us, little Miss, will you? And no bad feeling,
eh? And a safe journey and best greetings to your honoured
Father and the Frau Consul.” Then the coach door slammed,
the fat brown horses pulled at their traces, and the three
Schwarzkopfs waved their handkerchiefs.</p>

<p>Tony crooked her neck in the corner of the coach, in order
to peer out of the window. The sky was covered with white
cloud-flakes; the Trave broke into little waves that hurried
before the wind. Now and then drops of rain pattered against
the glass. At the end of the front people sat in the doors of
their cottages and mended nets; barefoot children came running
to look curiously at the carriage. <i>They</i> did not have to
go away!</p>

<p>As they left the last houses behind, Tony bent forward to
look at the light-house; then she leaned back and closed her
tired and burning eyes. She had hardly slept for excitement.
She had risen early to finish her packing, and discovered no
desire for breakfast. There was a dull taste in her mouth,
and she felt so weak that she made no effort to dry the slow,
hot tears that kept rising every minute.</p>

<p>But directly her eyes were shut, she found herself again in
Travemünde, on the verandah. She saw Morten in the flesh
before her; he seemed to speak and to lean toward her as he
always did, and then look good-naturedly and searchingly at
the next person, unconsciously showing his beautiful teeth as
he smiled. Slowly her mind grew calm and peaceful again.
She recalled everything that she had heard and learned from
him in many a talk, and it solaced her to promise herself
that she would preserve all this as a secret holy and inviolate
and cherish it in her heart. That the King of Prussia had
committed a great wrong against his people; that the local
newspaper was a lamentable sheet; yes, that the laws of the
League concerning universities had been renewed four years
ago—all these were from now on consoling and edifying
truths, a hidden treasure which she might store up within herself
and contemplate whenever she chose. On the street, in
the family circle, at the table she would think of them. Who
knew? Perhaps she might even go on in the path prescribed
for her and marry Herr Grünlich—that was a detail, after
all—but when he spoke to her she could always say to herself,
“I know something you don’t: the nobility is in principle
despicable.”</p>

<p>She smiled to herself and was assuaged. But suddenly, in
the noise of the wheels, she heard Morten’s voice with miraculous
clearness. She distinguished every nuance of his kindly,
dragging speech as he said: “To-day we must both ‘sit on
the rocks,’ Fräulein Tony,” and this little memory overpowered
her. Her breast contracted with her grief, and she
let the tears flow down unopposed. Bowed in her corner, she
held her handkerchief before her face and wept bitterly.</p>

<p>Thomas, his cigarette in his mouth, looked somewhat
blankly at the high-road. “Poor Tony,” he said at last,
stroking her jacket. “I feel so sorry—I understand so well,
you know. But what can you do? One has to bear these
things. Believe me, I do understand what you feel.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you don’t understand at all, Tom,” sobbed Tony.</p>

<p>“Don’t say that. Did you know it is decided that I am to
go to Amsterdam at the beginning of next year? Papa has
obtained a place for me with van der Kellen and Company.
That means I must say good-bye for a long, long time.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Tom! Saying good-bye to your father and mother
and sisters and brothers—that isn’t anything.”</p>

<p>“Ye-es,” he said, slowly. He sighed, as if he did not wish
to say more, and was silent. He let the cigarette rove from
one corner of his mouth to the other, lifted one eyebrow, and
turned his head away.</p>

<p>“Well, it doesn’t last for ever,” he began again after a
while. “Naturally one forgets.”</p>

<p>“But I don’t want to forget,” Tony cried out in desperation.
“Forgetting—is that any consolation?”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Then</span> came the ferry, and Israelsdorf Avenue, Jerusalem Hill,
the Castle Field. The wagon passed the Castle Gate, with the
walls of the prison rising on the right, and rolled along Castle
Street and over the Koberg. Tony looked at the grey gables,
the oil lamps hung across the streets, Holy Ghost Hospital
with the already almost bare lindens in front of it. Oh, how
everything was exactly as it had been! It had been standing
here, in immovable dignity, while she had thought of it as
a dream worthy only to be forgotten. These grey gables were
the old, the accustomed, the traditional, to which she was returning,
in the midst of which she must live. She wept no
more. She looked about curiously. The pain of parting was
almost dulled at the sight of these well-known streets and
faces. At that moment—the wagon was rolling through Broad
Street—the porter Matthiesen passed and took off his stove-pipe
hat so obsequiously that it seemed he must be thinking, “Bow,
you dog of a porter—you can’t bow low enough.”</p>

<p>The equipage turned into the Mengstrasse, and the fat brown
horses stood snorting and stamping before the Buddenbrook
door. Tom was very attentive in helping his sister out, while
Anton and Line hastened up to unfasten the trunk. But they
had to wait before they could enter the house. Three great
lorries were being driven through, one close behind another,
piled high with full corn sacks, with the firm name written
on them in big black letters. They jolted along over the
great boards and down the shallow steps to the cart-yard with
a heavy rumbling noise. Part of the corn was evidently to be
unloaded at the back of the house and the rest taken to the
“Walrus,” the “Lion,” or the “Oak.”</p>

<p>The Consul came out of the office with his pen behind his
ear as the brother and sister reached the entry, and stretched
out his arms to his daughter.</p>

<p>“Welcome home, my dear Tony!”</p>

<p>She kissed him, looking a little shame-faced, her eyes still
red with weeping. But he was very tactful; he made no allusions;
he only said: “It is late, but we waited with the
second breakfast.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul, Christian, Clothilde, Clara, and Ida
Jungmann stood above on the landing to greet her.</p>

<p>Tony slept soundly and well the first night in Mengstrasse.
She rose the next morning, the twenty-second of September, refreshed
and calmed, and went down into the breakfast-room.
It was still quite early, hardly seven o’clock. Only Mamsell
Jungmann was there, making the morning coffee.</p>

<p>“Well, well, Tony, my little child,” she said, looking round
with her small, blinking brown eyes. “Up so early?”</p>

<p>Tony sat down at the open desk, clasped her hands behind
her head, and looked for a while at the pavement of the court,
gleaming black with wet, and at the damp, yellow garden.
Then she began to rummage curiously among the visiting-cards
and letters on the desk. Close by the inkstand lay the well-known
large copy-book with the stamped cover, gilt edges, and
leaves of various qualities and colours. It must have been
used the evening before, and it was strange that Papa had not
put it back in its leather portfolio and laid it in its special
drawer.</p>

<p>She took it and turned over the pages, began to read, and
became absorbed. What she read were mostly simple facts
well-known to her; but each successive writer had followed
his predecessor in a stately but simple chronicle style which
was no bad mirror of the family attitude, its modest but honourable
self-respect, and its reverence for tradition and history.
The book was not new to Tony; she had sometimes
been allowed to read in it. But its contents had never made
the impression upon her that they did this morning. She was
thrilled by the reverent particularity with which the simplest
facts pertinent to the family were here treated. She propped
herself on her elbows and read with growing absorption, seriousness
and pride.</p>

<p>No point in her own tiny past was lacking. Her birth, her
childish illnesses, her first school, her boarding-school days
at Mademoiselle Weichbrodt’s, her confirmation—everything
was carefully entered, with an almost reverent observation of
facts, in the Consul’s small, flowing business hand; for was
not the least of them the will and work of God, who wonderfully
guided the destinies of the family? What, she mused,
would there be entered here in the future after her name, which
she had received from her grandmother Antoinette? All that
was yet to be written there would be conned by later members
of the family with a piety equal to her own.</p>

<p>She leaned back sighing; her heart beat solemnly. She
was filled with reverence for herself: the familiar feeling of
personal importance possessed her, heightened by all she had
been reading. She felt thrilled and shuddery. “Like a link
in a chain,” Papa had written. Yes, yes. She was important
precisely as a link in this chain. Such was her significance
and her responsibility, such her task: to share by deed and
word in the history of her family.</p>

<p>She turned back to the end of the great volume, where on a
rough folio page was entered the genealogy of the whole
Buddenbrook family, with parentheses and rubrics, indicated
in the Consul’s hand, and all the dates set down: from the
marriage of the earliest scion of the family with Brigitta
Schuren, the pastor’s daughter, down to the wedding of Consul
Johann Buddenbrook with Elizabeth Kröger in 1825. From
this marriage, it said, four children had resulted: whereupon
these were all entered, with the days and years of their birth,
and their baptismal names, one after another. Under that of
the eldest son it was recorded that he had entered as apprentice
in his father’s business in the Easter of 1842.</p>

<p>Tony looked a long time at her name and at the blank
space next it. Then, suddenly, with a jerk, with a nervous,
feverish accompaniment of sobbing breaths and quick-moving
lips—she clutched the pen, plunged it rather than dipped it
into the ink, and wrote, with her forefinger crooked, her hot
head bent far over on her shoulder, in her awkward handwriting
that climbed up the page from left to right: “Betrothed,
on Sept. 22, 1845, to Herr Bendix Grünlich, Merchant,
of Hamburg.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XIV</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">I entirely</span> agree with you, my good friend. This important
matter must be settled. In short, then: the usual dowry of
a young girl of our family is seventy thousand marks.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich cast at his future father-in-law a shrewd,
calculating glance—the glance of the genuine man of business.</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact,” he said—and this “matter of fact”
was of precisely the same length as his left-hand whisker,
which he was drawing reflectively through his fingers; he
let go of the end just as “of fact” was finished.</p>

<p>“You know, my honoured father,” he began again, “the deep
respect I have for traditions and principles. Only—in the
present case is not this consideration for the tradition a little
exaggerated? A business increases—a family prospers—in
short, conditions change and improve.”</p>

<p>“My good friend,” said the Consul, “you see in me a fair-dealing
merchant. You have not let me finish, or you would
have heard that I am ready and willing to meet you in the
circumstances, and add ten thousand marks to the seventy
thousand without more ado.”</p>

<p>“Eighty thousand, then,” said Herr Grünlich, making motions
with his mouth, as though to say: “Not <i>too</i> much; but
it will do.”</p>

<p>Thus they came to an affectionate settlement; the Consul
jingled his keys like a man satisfied as he got up. And,
in fact, his satisfaction was justified; for it was only with the
eighty thousand marks that they had arrived at the dowry
traditional in the family.</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich now said good-bye and departed for Hamburg.
Tony as yet realized but little of her new estate. She still
went to dances at the Möllendorpfs’, Kistenmakers’, and Langhals’,
and in her own home; she skated on the Burgfield and
the meadows of the Trave, and permitted the attentions of
the young gentlemen of the town. In the middle of October
she went to the betrothal feast at the Möllendorpfs’ for the
oldest son of the house and Juliet Hagenström. “Tom,” she
said, “I won’t go. It is disgusting.” But she went, and enjoyed
herself hugely. And, as for the rest, by the entry with
the pen in the family history-book, she had won the privilege
of going, with the Frau Consul or alone, into all the shops in
town and making purchases in a grand style for her trousseau.
It was to be a brilliant trousseau. Two seamstresses
sat all day in the breakfast-room window, sewing, embroidering
monograms, and eating quantities of house-bread and
green cheese.</p>

<p>“Is the linen come from Lentföhr, Mamma?”</p>

<p>“No, but here are two dozen tea-serviettes.”</p>

<p>“That is nice. But he promised it by this afternoon. My
goodness, the sheets still have to be hemmed.”</p>

<p>“Mamsell Bitterlich wants to know about the lace for the
pillow-cases, Ida.”</p>

<p>“It is in the right-hand cupboard in the entry, Tony, my
child.”</p>

<p>“Line—!”</p>

<p>“You could go yourself, my dear.”</p>

<p>“Oh, if I’m marrying for the privilege of running up and
down stairs—!”</p>

<p>“Have you made up your mind yet about the material for
the wedding-dress, Tony?”</p>

<p>“Moiré antique, Mamma—I won’t marry without moiré
antique!”</p>

<p>So passed October and November. At Christmas time Herr
Grünlich appeared, to spend Christmas in the Buddenbrook
family circle and also to take part in the celebration at the
Krögers’. His conduct toward his bride showed all the delicacy
one would have expected from him. No unnecessary
formality, no importunity, no tactless tenderness. A light,
discreet kiss upon the forehead, in the presence of the parents,
sealed the betrothal. Tony sometimes puzzled over this, the
least in the world. Why, she wondered, did his present happiness
seem not quite commensurate with the despair into
which her refusal had thrown him? He regarded her with
the air of a satisfied possessor. Now and then, indeed, if
they happened to be alone, a jesting and teasing mood seemed
to overcome him; once he attempted to fall on his knees and
approach his whiskers to her face, while he asked in a voice
apparently trembling with joy, “Have I indeed captured you?
Have I won you for my own?” To which Tony answered,
“You are forgetting yourself,” and got away with all possible
speed.</p>

<p>Soon after the holidays Herr Grünlich went back to Hamburg,
for his flourishing business demanded his personal attention;
and the Buddenbrooks agreed with him that Tony
had had time enough before the betrothal to make his acquaintance.</p>

<p>The question of a house was quickly arranged. Tony, who
looked forward extravagantly to life in a large city, had
expressed the wish to settle in Hamburg itself, and indeed in
the Spitalstrasse, where Herr Grünlich’s office was. But the
bridegroom, by manly persistence, won her over to the purchase
of a villa outside the city, near Eimsbüttel, a romantic
and retired spot, an ideal nest for a newly-wedded pair—“<i>procul
negotiis</i>.”—Ah, he had not yet forgotten quite all
his Latin!</p>

<p>Thus December passed, and at the beginning of the year
’46 the wedding was celebrated. There was a splendid wedding
feast, to which half the town was bidden. Tony’s friends—among
them Armgard von Schilling, who arrived in a
towering coach—danced with Tom’s and Christian’s friends,
among them Andreas Gieseke, son of the Fire Commissioner
and now <i>studiosus juris</i>; also Stephan and Edward Kistenmacher,
of Kistenmacher and Son. They danced in the dining-room
and the hall, which had been strewn with talc for the
occasion. Among the liveliest of the lively was Consul Peter
Döhlmann; he got hold of all the earthenware crocks he could
find and broke them on the flags of the big passage.</p>

<p>Frau Stuht from Bell-Founders’ Street had another opportunity
to mingle in the society of the great; for it was she
who helped Mamsell Jungmann and the two seamstresses to
adjust Tony’s toilette on the great day. She had, as God was
her judge, never seen a more beautiful bride. Fat as she
was, she went on her knees; and, with her eyes rolled up in
admiration, fastened the myrtle twigs on the white moiré antique.
This was in the breakfast-room. Herr Grünlich, in
his long-skirted frock-coat and silk waistcoat, waited at the
door. His rosy face had a correct and serious expression, his
wart was powdered, and his gold-yellow whiskers carefully
curled.</p>

<p>Above in the hall, where the marriage was to take place,
the family gathered—a stately assemblage. There sat the old
Krögers, a little ailing both of them, but distinguished figures
always. There was Consul Kröger with his sons Jürgen and
Jacob, the latter having come from Hamburg, like the Duchamps.
There were Gottfried Buddenbrook and his wife,
born Stüwing, with their three offspring, Friederike, Henriette,
and Pfiffi, none of whom was, unfortunately, likely to
marry. There was the Mecklenburg branch, represented by
Clothilde’s father, Herr Bernhard Buddenbrook, who had
come in from Thankless and looked with large eyes at the
seignorial house of his rich relations. The relatives from
Frankfort had contented themselves with sending presents;
the journey was too arduous. In their place were the only
guests not members of the family. Dr. Grabow, the family
physician, and Mlle. Weichbrodt, Tony’s motherly friend—Sesemi
Weichbrodt, with fresh ribbons on her cap over the
side-curls, and a little black dress. “Be happy, you good
child,” she said, when Tony appeared at Herr Grünlich’s
side in the hall. She reached up and kissed her with a little
explosion on the forehead. The family was satisfied with the
bride: Tony looked pretty, gay, and at her ease, if a little
pale from excitement and tension.</p>

<p>The hall had been decorated with flowers and an altar arranged
on the right side. Pastor Kölling of St. Mary’s performed
the service, and laid special stress upon moderation.
Everything went according to custom and arrangement, Tony
brought out a hearty yes, and Herr Grünlich gave his little
ahem, beforehand, to clear his throat. Afterward, everybody
ate long and well.</p>

<p>While the guests continued to eat in the salon, with the
pastor in their midst, the Consul and his wife accompanied
the young pair, who had dressed for their journey, out into the
snowy, misty air, where the great travelling coach stood before
the door, packed with boxes and bags.</p>

<p>After Tony had expressed many times her conviction that
she should soon be back again on a visit, and that they too
would not delay long to come to Hamburg to see her, she
climbed in good spirits into the coach and let herself be carefully
wrapped up by the Consul in the warm fur rug. Her
husband took his place by her side.</p>

<p>“And, Grünlich,” said the Consul, “the new laces are in
the small satchel, on top. You take a little in under your
overcoat, don’t you? This excise—one has to get around it
the best one can. Farewell, farewell! Farewell, dear Tony.
God bless you.”</p>

<p>“You will find good accommodation in Arensburg, won’t
you?” asked the Frau Consul. “Already reserved, my dear
Mamma,” answered Herr Grünlich.</p>

<p>Anton, Line, Trine, and Sophie took leave of Ma’am Grünlich.
The coach door was about to be slammed, when Tony
was overtaken by a sudden impulse. Despite all the trouble
it took, she unwound herself again from her wrappings,
climbed ruthlessly over Herr Grünlich, who began to grumble,
and embraced her Father with passion. “Adieu, Papa, adieu,
my good Papa.” And then she whispered softly: “Are you
satisfied with me?”</p>

<p>The Consul pressed her without words to his heart, then
put her from him and shook her hands with deep feeling.</p>

<p>Now everything was ready. The coach door slammed, the
coachman cracked his whip, the horses dashed away so that
the coach windows rattled; the Frau Consul let fly her little
white handkerchief; and the carriage, rolling down the street,
disappeared in the mist.</p>

<p>The Consul stood thoughtfully next to his wife, who drew
her cloak about her shoulders with a graceful movement.</p>

<p>“There she goes, Betsy.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Jean, the first to leave us. Do you think she is
happy with him?”</p>

<p>“Oh, Betsy, she is satisfied with herself, which is better;
it is the most solid happiness we can have on this earth.”</p>

<p>They went back to their guests.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Thomas Buddenbrook</span> went down Meng Street as far as the
“Five Houses.” He avoided Broad Street so as not to be accosted
by acquaintances and obliged to greet them. With his
hands deep in the big pockets of his warm dark grey overcoat,
he walked, sunk in thought, over the hard, sparkling snow,
which crunched under his boots. He went his own way, and
whither it led no one knew but himself. The sky was pale blue
and clear, the air biting and crisp—a still, severe, clear
weather, with five degrees of frost; in short, a matchless February
day.</p>

<p>Thomas walked down the “Five Houses,” crossed Bakers’
Alley, and went along a narrow cross-street into Fishers’
Lane. He followed this street, which led down to the Trave
parallel to Meng Street, for a few steps, and paused before
a small house, a modest flower-shop, with a narrow door and
dingy show-window, where a few pots of onions stood on a
pane of green glass.</p>

<p>He went in, whereupon the bell above the door began to
give tongue, like a little watch-dog. Within, before the counter,
talking to the young saleswoman, was a little fat elderly
lady in a Turkey shawl. She was choosing a pot of flowers,
examining, smelling, criticizing, chattering, and constantly
obliged to wipe her mouth with her handkerchief. Thomas
Buddenbrook greeted her politely and stepped to one side.
She was a poor relation of the Langhals’, a good-natured
garrulous old maid who bore the name of one of the best
families without herself belonging to their set: that is, she
was not asked to the large dinners, but to the small coffee
circles. She was known to almost all the world as Aunt
Lottchen. She turned toward the door, with her pot of
flowers, wrapped up in tissue paper, under her arm; and
Thomas, after greeting her again, said in an elevated voice
to the shop girl, “Give me a couple of roses, please. Never
mind the kind—well, La France.”</p>

<p>Then, after Aunt Lottchen had shut the door behind her
and gone away, he said in a lower voice, “Put them away
again, Anna. How are you, little Anna? Here I am—and
I’ve come with a heavy heart.”</p>

<p>Anna wore a white apron over her simple black frock.
She was wonderfully pretty. Delicately built as a fawn, she
had an almost mongol type of face, somewhat prominent
cheek-bones, narrow black eyes full of a soft gleam, and a
pale yellow skin the like of which is rare anywhere. Her
hands, of the same tint, were narrow, and more beautiful than
a shop girl’s are wont to be.</p>

<p>She went behind the counter at the right end, so that she
could not be seen through the shop-window. Thomas followed
on the outside of the counter and, bending over, kissed her on
the lips and the eyes.</p>

<p>“You are quite frozen, poor boy,” she said.</p>

<p>“Five degrees,” said Tom. “I didn’t notice it, I’ve felt
so sad coming over.”</p>

<p>He sat down on the table, keeping her hand in his, and
went on: “Listen, Anna; we’ll be sensible to-day, won’t we?
The time has come.”</p>

<p>“Oh, dear,” she said miserably, and lifted her apron to
her eyes.</p>

<p>“It had to happen sometime, Anna. No, don’t weep. We
were going to be reasonable, weren’t we? What else is there
to do? One has to bear such things.”</p>

<p>“When?” asked Anna, sobbing.</p>

<p>“Day after to-morrow.”</p>

<p>“Oh, God, no! Why to-morrow? A week longer—five
days! Please, oh, please!”</p>

<p>“Impossible, dear Anna. Everything is arranged and in
order. They are expecting me in Amsterdam. I couldn’t
make it a day longer, no matter how much I wanted.”</p>

<p>“And that is so far away—so far away!”</p>

<p>“Amsterdam? Nonsense, that isn’t far. We can always
think of each other, can’t we? And I’ll write to you. You’ll
see, I’ll write directly I’ve got there.”</p>

<p>“Do you remember,” she said, “a year and a half ago, at
the Rifle-club fair?”</p>

<p>He interrupted her ardently. “Do I remember? Yes, a
year and a half ago! I took you for an Italian. I bought
a pink and put it in my button-hole.—I still have it—I am taking
it with me to Amsterdam.—What a heat: how hot and
dusty it was on the meadow!”</p>

<p>“Yes, you bought me a glass of lemonade from the next
booth. I remember it like yesterday. Everything smelled
of fatty-cakes and people.”</p>

<p>“But it was fine! We knew right away how we felt—about
each other!”</p>

<p>“You wanted to take me on the carroussel, but I couldn’t
go; I had to be in the shop. The old woman would have
scolded.”</p>

<p>“No, I know it wouldn’t have done, Anna.”</p>

<p>She said softly and clearly, “But that is the only thing I’ve
refused you.”</p>

<p>He kissed her again, on the lips and the eyes. “Adieu,
darling little Anna. We must begin to say good-bye.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you will come back to-morrow?”</p>

<p>“Yes, of course, and day after to-morrow early, if I
can get away.—But there is one thing I want to say to you,
Anna. I am going, after all, rather far away. Amsterdam <i>is</i>
a long way off—and you are staying here. But—don’t throw
yourself away, I tell you.”</p>

<p>She wept into her apron, holding it up with her free hand
to her face. “And you—and you?”</p>

<p>“God knows, Anna, what will happen. One isn’t young
for ever—you are a sensible girl, you have never said anything
about marriage and that sort of thing—”</p>

<p>“God forbid—that I should ask such a thing of you!”</p>

<p>“One is carried along—you see. If I live, I shall take
over the business, and make a good match—you see, I am
open with you at parting, Anna. I wish you every happiness,
darling, darling little Anna. But don’t throw yourself
away, do you hear? For you haven’t done that—with me—I
swear it.”</p>

<p>It was warm in the shop. A moist scent of earth and
flowers was in the air. Outside, the winter sun was hurrying
to its repose, and a pure delicate sunset, like one painted
on porcelain, beautified the sky across the river. People
hurried past the window, their chins tucked into their
turned-up collars; no one gave a glance into the corner of
the little flower-shop, at the two who stood there saying their
last farewells.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">PART FOUR</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<div class="blockquot">
<p class="right">April 30, 1846</p>

<p><span class="smcap">My dear Mamma</span>,</p>

<p>A thousand thanks for your letter, in which you tell me of
Armgard von Schilling’s betrothal to Herr von Maiboom of
Pöppenrade. Armgard herself sent me an invitation (very
fine, with a gilt edge), and also a letter in which she expresses
herself as enchanted with her bridegroom. He sounds like a
very handsome and refined man. How happy she must be!
Everybody is getting married. I have had a card from Munich
too, from Eva Ewers. I hear she’s getting a director of a
brewery.</p>

<p>Now I must ask you something, dearest Mamma: Why do
I hear nothing of a visit from the Buddenbrooks? Are you
waiting for an official invitation from Grünlich? If so, it isn’t
necessary; and besides, when I remind him to ask you, he
says, “Yes, yes, child, your Father has something else to do.”
Or do you think you would be disturbing me? Oh, dear me,
no; quite the contrary! Perhaps you think you would make
me homesick again? But don’t you know I am a reasonable
woman, already middle-aged and experienced?</p>

<p>I’ve just been to coffee at Madame Käselau’s, a neighbour
of mine. They are pleasant people, and our left-hand neighbours,
the Gussmanns (but there is a good deal of space between
the houses) are sociable people too. We have two
friends who are at the house a good deal, both of whom live
out here: Doctor Klaasen, of whom I must tell you more
later, and Kesselmeyer, the banker, Grünlich’s intimate friend.
You don’t know what a funny old man he is. He has a
stubbly white beard and thin black and white hair on his head,
that looks like down and waves in the breeze. He makes
funny motions with his head, like a bird, and talks all the
time, so I call him the magpie, but Grünlich has forbidden
me to say that, because magpies steal, and Herr Kesselmeyer
is an honourable man. He stoops when he walks, and rows
along with his arms. His fuzz only reaches half-way down
his head in the back, and from there on his neck is all red
and seamy. There is something so awfully sprightly about
him! Sometimes he pats me on the cheek and says, “You
good little wifey! what a blessing for Grünlich that he has
got you.” Then he takes out his eye-glasses (he always wears
three of them, on long cords, that are forever getting tangled
up in his white waistcoat) and sticks them on his nose, which
he wrinkles up to make them stop on, and looks at me with
his mouth open, until I have to laugh, right in his face.
But he takes no offence at that.</p>

<p>Grünlich is very busy; he drives into town in the morning
in our little yellow wagon and often does not come back
till late. Sometimes he sits down with me and reads the paper.</p>

<p>When we go into society—for example, to Kesselmeyer’s,
or to Consul Goudstikker on the Alster Dam, or Senator Bock
in City Hall Street—we have to take a hired coach. I have
begged Grünlich again and again to get a coupé, for it is
really a necessity out here. He has half promised, but,
strange to say, he does not like to go into society with me and
is evidently displeased when I visit people in the town. Do
you suppose he is jealous?</p>

<p>Our villa, which I’ve already described to you in detail,
dear Mamma, is really very pretty, and is much prettier by
reason of the new furnishings. You could not find a flaw
in the upstairs sitting-room—all in brown silk. The dining-room
next is prettily wainscoted. The chairs cost twenty-five
marks apiece. I sit in the “pensée-room,” which we
use as a sitting-room. There is also a little room for smoking
and playing cards. The salon, which takes up the whole
other half of the parterre, has new yellow blinds now and
looks very well. Above are the bed, bath, and dressing-rooms
and the servants’ quarters. We have a little groom for the
yellow wagon. I am fairly well satisfied with the two maidservants.
I am not sure they are quite honest, but thank God
I don’t have to look after every kreuzer. In short, everything
is really worthy of the family and the firm.</p>

<p>And now, dear Mamma, comes the most important part of
my letter, which I have kept till the last. A while ago I was
feeling rather queer—not exactly ill and yet not quite well.
I told Dr. Klaasen about it when I had the chance. He is
a little bit of a man with a big head and a still bigger hat.
He carries a cane with a flat round handle made of a piece of
bone, and walks with it pressed against his whiskers, which are
almost light-green from being dyed so many years. Well, you
should have seen him! he did not answer my questions at all,
but jerked his eye-glasses, twinkled his little eyes, wrinkled
his nose at me—it looks like a potato—snickered, giggled,
and stared so impertinently that I did not know what to do.
Then he examined me, and said everything was going on well,
only I must drink mineral water, because I am perhaps a
little anæmic. Oh, Mamma, do tell Papa about it, so he can
put it in the family book. I will write you again as soon
as possible, you may be sure.</p>

<p>Give my love to Papa, Christian, Clara, Clothilde and Ida
Jungmann. I wrote to Thomas just lately.</p>

<p class="right"><span class="indentright">Your dutiful daughter,</span><br/>

<span class="smcap">Antonie</span>.</p>

<hr class="tiny"/>
<p class="right">August 2, 1846</p>

<p><span class="smcap">My dear Thomas</span>,</p>

<p>I have read with pleasure the news of your meeting with
Christian in Amsterdam. It must have been a happy few
days for both of you. I have no word as yet of your brother’s
further journey to England via Ostende, but I hope that with
God’s mercy it has been safely accomplished. It may not be
too late, since Christian has decided to give up a professional
career, for him to learn much that is valuable from his chief,
Mr. Richardson; may he prosper and find blessing in the
mercantile line! Mr. Richardson, Threadneedle Street, is, as
you know, a close business friend of our house; I consider
myself lucky to have placed both my sons with such friendly-disposed
firms. You are now experiencing the good result
of such a policy; and I feel profound satisfaction that Herr
van der Kellen has already raised your salary in the quarter
of a year you have been with him, and that he will continue
to give you advancement. I am convinced that you have
shown and will continue to show yourself, by your industry
and good behaviour, worthy of these favours.</p>

<p>I regret to hear that your health is not so good as it should
be. What you write me of nervousness reminds me of my
own youth, when I was working in Antwerp and had to go
to Ems to take a cure. If anything of the sort seems best for
you, my son, I am ready to encourage you with advice and
assistance, although I am avoiding such expense for the rest
of us in these times of political unrest.</p>

<p>However, your Mother and I took a trip to Hamburg in
the middle of June to visit your sister Tony. Her husband
had not invited us, but he received us with the greatest cordiality
and devoted himself to us so entirely during the two
days of our visit, that he neglected his business and hardly
left me time for a visit to Duchamps in the town. Antonie
is in her fifth month, and her physician assures her that everything
is going on in a normal and satisfactory way.</p>

<p>I have still to mention a letter from Herr van der Kellen,
from which I was pleased to learn that you are a favoured
guest in his family circle. You are now, my son, at an age
to begin to harvest the fruits of the upbringing your parents
gave you. It may be helpful to you if I tell you that at your
age, both in Antwerp and Bergen, I formed a habit of making
myself useful and agreeable to my principals; and this
was of the greatest service to me. Aside from the honour
of association with the family of the head of the firm, one
acquires an advocate in the person of the principal’s wife;
and she may prove invaluable in the undesirable contingency
of an oversight at the office or the dissatisfaction of your chief
for some slight cause or other.</p>

<p>As regards your business plans for the future, my son, I
rejoice in the lively interest they indicate, without being able
entirely to agree with them. You start with the idea that the
market for our native products—for instance, grain, rapeseed,
hides and skins, wool, oil, oil-cake, bones, etc.—is our
chief concern; and you think it would be of advantage for
you to turn yourself to the commission branch of the business.
I once occupied myself with these ideas, at a time when
the competition was small (it has since distinctly increased),
and I made some experiments in them. My journey to England
had for its chief purpose to look out connections
there for my undertakings. To this end I went as far as
Scotland, and made many valuable acquaintances; but I
soon recognized the precarious nature of an export trade
hither, and decided to discourage further expansion in that
direction. Thus I kept in mind the warning of our forefather,
the founder of the firm, which he bequeathed to us,
his descendants: “My son, attend with zeal to thy business
by day, but do none that hinders thee from thy sleep at
night.”</p>

<p>This principle I intend to keep sacred, now as in the past,
though one is sometimes forced to entertain a doubt, on contemplating
the operations of people who seem to get on
better without it. I am thinking of Strunk and Hagenström,
who have made such notable progress while our own business
seems almost at a stand-still. You know that the house has not
enlarged its business since the set-back consequent upon the
death of your grandfather; and I pray to God that I shall be
able to turn over the business to you in its present state. I
have an experienced and cautious adviser in our head clerk
Marcus. If only your Mother’s family would hang on to their
groschen a little better! The inheritance is a matter of real
importance for us.</p>

<p>I am unusually full of business and civic work. I have
been made alderman of the Board of the Bergen Line;
also city deputy for the Finance Department, the Chamber
of Commerce, the Auditing Commission, and the Almshouse
of St. Anne, one after the other.</p>

<p>Your Mother, Clara and Clothilde send greetings. Also
several gentlemen—Senator Möllendorpf, Doctor Överdieck,
Consul Kistenmaker, Gosch the broker, C. F. Köppen, and
Herr Marcus in the office, have asked to be remembered.
God’s blessing on you, my dear son. Work, pray, and save.</p>

<p class="right"><span class="indentright">With affectionate regards,</span><br/>
<span class="smcap">Your Father</span>.</p>

<hr class="tiny"/>

<p class="right">October 8, 1846</p>

<p><span class="smcap">Dear and honoured Parents</span>,</p>

<p>The undersigned is overjoyed to be able to advise you of
the happy <i>accouchement</i>, half an hour ago, of your daughter,
my beloved wife Antonie. It is, by God’s will, a daughter;
I can find no words to express my joyful emotion. The health
of the dear patient, as well as of the infant, is unexceptionable.
Dr. Klaasen is entirely satisfied with the way things
have gone; and Frau Grossgeorgis, the midwife, says it was
simply nothing at all. Excitement obliges me to lay down my
pen. I commend myself to my worthy parents with the most
respectful affection.</p>

<p class="right"><span class="smcap">B. Grünlich.</span></p>

<p>If it had been a boy, I had a very pretty name. As it is, I
wanted to name her Meta, but Grünlich is for Erica.</p>
</div>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">What</span> is the matter, Betsy?” said the Consul, as he came
to the table and lifted up the plate with which his soup was
covered. “Aren’t you well? You don’t look just right to
me.”</p>

<p>The round table in the great dining-room was grown very
small. Around it there gathered in these days, besides the
parents, only little Clara, now ten years old, Mamsell Jungmann,
and Clothilde, as humble, lean, and hungry as ever.
The Consul looked about him: every face was long and gloomy.
What had happened? He himself was troubled and anxious;
for the Bourse was unsteady, owing to this complicated
Schleswig-Holstein affair. And still another source of disquiet
was in the air; when Anton had gone to fetch in the
meat course, the Consul heard what had happened. Trina,
the cook, who had never before been anything but loyal and
dutiful to her mistress, had suddenly shown clear signs of
revolt. To the Frau Consul’s great vexation, she had been
maintaining relations—a sort of spiritual affinity, it seemed—with
the butcher’s apprentice; and that man of blood must
have influenced her political views in a most regrettable way.
The Consul’s wife had addressed some reproach to her in the
matter of an unsuccessful sauce, and she had put her naked
arms akimbo and delivered herself as follows: “You jus’
wait, Frau Consul; ’tain’ goin’ t’ be much longer—there’ll
come another order inter the world. ’N’ then <i>I’ll</i> be sittin’
on the sofa in a silk gownd, an’ you’ll be servin’ me.” Naturally,
she received summary notice.</p>

<p>The Consul shook his head. He himself had had similar
troubles. The old porters and labourers were of course respectful
enough, and had no notions in their heads; but several
here and there among the young ones had shown by their
bearing that the new spirit of revolt had entered into them.
In the spring there had been a street riot, although a constitution
corresponding to the demands of the new time had
already been drafted; which, a little later, despite the opposition
of Lebrecht Kröger and other stubborn old gentlemen, became
law by a decree of the Senate. The citizens met together
and representatives of the people were elected. But
there was no rest. The world was upside down. Every one
wanted to revise the constitution and the franchise, and the
citizens grumbled. “Voting by estates,” said some—Consul
Johann Buddenbrook among them. “Universal franchise,”
said the others; Heinrich Hagenström was one of these. Still
others cried “Universal voting by estates”—and dear knew
what they meant by that! All sorts of ideas were in the air;
for instance, the abolition of disabilities and the general extension
of the rights of citizenship—even to non-Christians!
No wonder Buddenbrook’s Trina had imbibed such ideas
about sofas and silk gowns! Oh, there was worse to come!
Things threatened to take a fearful turn.</p>

<p>It was an early October day of the year 1848. The sky
was blue, with a few light floating clouds in it, silvered by
the rays of the sun, the strength of which was indeed not so
great but that the stove was already going, behind the polished
screen in the landscape-room. Little Clara, whose hair had
grown darker and whose eyes had a rather severe expression,
sat with some embroidery before the sewing-table, while
Clothilde, busy likewise with her needlework, had the sofa-place
near the Frau Consul. Although Clothilde Buddenbrook
was not much older than her married cousin—that is to
say, only twenty-one years—her long face already showed
pronounced lines; and with her smooth hair, which had never
been blond, but always a dull greyish colour, she presented
an ideal portrait of a typical old maid. But she was content;
she did nothing to alter her condition. Perhaps she
thought it best to grow old early and thus to make a quick
end of all doubts and hopes. As she did not own a single
sou, she knew that she would find nobody in all the wide
world to marry her, and she looked with humility into her
future, which would surely consist of consuming a tiny income
in some tiny room which her influential uncle would
procure for her out of the funds of some charitable establishment
for maidens of good family.</p>

<p>The Consul’s wife was busy reading two letters. Tony
related the good progress of the little Erica, and Christian
wrote eagerly of his life and doings in London. He did not
give any details of his industry with Mr. Richardson of
Threadneedle Street. The Frau Consul, who was approaching
the middle forties, complained bitterly of the tendency
of blond women to grow old too soon. The delicate tint
which corresponded to her reddish hair had grown dulled
despite all cosmetics; and the hair itself began relentlessly to
grey, or would have done so but for a Parisian tincture of
which the Frau Consul had the receipt. She was determined
never to grow white. When the dye would no longer perform
its office, she would wear a blond wig. On top of her still
artistic coiffure was a silk scarf bordered with white lace,
the beginning, the first adumbration of a cap. Her silk frock
was wide and flowing, its bell-shaped sleeves lined with the
softest mull. A pair of gold circlets tinkled as usual on
her wrist.</p>

<p>It was three o’clock in the afternoon. Suddenly there was
a noise of running and shouting: a sort of insolent hooting
and cat-calling, the stamping of feet on the pavement, a hubbub
that grew louder and came nearer.</p>

<p>“What is that noise, Mamma?” said Clara, looking out of
the window and into the gossip’s glass. “Look at the people!
What is the matter with them? What are they so pleased
about?”</p>

<p>“My God!” shouted the Frau Consul, throwing down her
letters and springing to the window. “Is it—? My God, it is
the Revolution! It is the people!”</p>

<p>The truth was that the town had been the whole day in a
state of unrest. In the morning the windows of Benthien the
draper’s shop in Broad Street had been broken by stones—although
God knew what the owner had to do with politics!</p>

<p>“Anton,” the Consul’s wife called with a trembling voice
into the dining-room, where the servants were bustling about
with the silver. “Anton! Go below! Shut the outside
doors. Make everything fast. It is a mob.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Frau Consul,” said Anton. “Is it safe for me to
do that? I am a servant. If they see my livery—”</p>

<p>“What wicked people,” Clothilde drawled without putting
down her work. Just then the Consul crossed the entrance
hall and came in through the glass door. He carried his
coat over his arm and his hat in his hand.</p>

<p>“You are going out, Jean?” asked the Frau Consul in great
excitement and trepidation.</p>

<p>“Yes, my dear, I must go to the meeting.”</p>

<p>“But the mob, Jean, the Revolution—”</p>

<p>“Oh, dear me, Betsy, it isn’t so serious as that! We are
in God’s hand. They have gone past the house already. I’ll
go down the back way.”</p>

<p>“Jean, if you love me—do you want to expose yourself to
this danger? Will you leave us here unprotected? I am
afraid, I tell you—I am afraid.”</p>

<p>“My dear, I beg of you, don’t work yourself up like this.
They will only make a bit of a row in front of the Town Hall
or in the market. It may cost the government a few window-panes—but
that’s all.”</p>

<p>“Where are you going, Jean?”</p>

<p>“To the Assembly. I am late already. I was detained
by business. It would be a shame not to be there to-day.
Do you think your Father is stepping away, old as he
is?”</p>

<p>“Then go, in God’s name, Jean. But be careful, I beg of
you. And keep an eye on my Father. If anything hit him—”</p>

<p>“Certainly, my dear.”</p>

<p>“When will you be back?” the Frau Consul called after
him.</p>

<p>“Well, about half-past four or five o’clock. Depends.
There is a good deal of importance on the agenda, so I can’t
exactly tell.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I’m frightened, I’m frightened,” repeated the Frau
Consul, walking up and down restlessly.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Consul Buddenbrook</span> crossed his spacious ground floor in
haste. Coming out into Bakers’ Alley, he heard steps behind
him and saw Gosch the broker, a picturesque figure in his long
cloak and Jesuit hat, also climbing the narrow street to the
meeting. He lifted his hat with one thin long hand, and
with the other made a deferential gesture, as he said, “Well,
Herr Consul—how are you?” His voice sounded sinister.</p>

<p>This broker, Siegismund Gosch, a bachelor of some forty
years, was, despite his demeanour, the best and most honest
soul in the world; but he was a wit and an oddity. His
smooth-shaven face was distinguished by a Roman nose, a
protruding pointed chin, sharp features, and a wide mouth
drooping at the corners, whose narrow lips he was in the
habit of pressing together in the most taciturn and forbidding
manner. His grey hair fell thick and sombre over his brow,
and he actually regretted not being humpbacked. It was his
whim to assume the rôle of a wild, witty, and reckless intrigant—a
cross between Mephistopheles and Napoleon,
something very malevolent and yet fascinating too; and
he was not entirely unsuccessful in his pose. He was
a strange yet attractive figure among the citizens of the
old city; still, he belonged among them, for he carried on
a small brokerage business in the most modest, respectable
sort of way. In his narrow, dark little office, however, he
had a large book-case filled with poetry in every language,
and there was a story that he had been engaged since his
twentieth year on a translation of Lope de Vega’s collected
dramas. Once he had played the rôle of Domingo in an
amateur performance of Schiller’s “Don Carlos”—this was
the culmination of his career. A common word never crossed
his lips; and the most ordinary business expressions he would
hiss between his clenched teeth, as if he were saying “Curses
on you, villain,” instead of some commonplace about stocks
and commissions. He was, in many ways, the heir and successor
to Jean Jacques Hoffstede of blessed memory, except that
his character had certain elements of the sombre and pathetic,
with none of the playful liveliness of that old 18th century
friend of Johann Buddenbrook. One day he lost at a single
blow, on the Bourse, six and a half thaler on two or three
papers which he had bought as a speculation. This was
enough. He sank upon a bench; he struck an attitude which
looked as though he had lost the Battle of Waterloo; he
struck his clenched fist against his forehead and repeated
several times, with a blasphemous roll of the eyes: “Ha,
accursed, accursed!” He must have been, at bottom, cruelly
bored by the small, safe business he did and the petty transfer
of this or that bit of property; for this loss, this tragic
blow with which Heaven had stricken him down—him, the
schemer Gosch—delighted his inmost soul. He fed on it for
weeks. Some one would say, “So you’ve had a loss, Herr
Gosch, I’m sorry to hear.” To which he would answer:
“Oh, my good friend, ‘<i>uomo non educato dal dolore riman
sempre bambino</i>’!” Probably nobody understood that. Was
it, possibly, Lope da Vega? Anyhow, there was no doubt
that this Siegismund Gosch was a remarkable and learned
man.</p>

<p>“What times we live in,” he said, limping up the street
with the Consul, supported by his stick. “Times of storm
and unrest.”</p>

<p>“You are right,” replied the Consul. “The times are unquiet.
This morning’s sitting will be exciting. The principle
of the estates—”</p>

<p>“Well, now,” Herr Gosch went on, “I have been about all
day in the streets, and I have been looking at the mob. There
are some fine fellows in it, their eyes flaming with excitement
and hatred—”</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook began to laugh. “You like that, don’t,
you? But you have the right end of it after all, let me tell
you. It is all childishness! What do these men want? A
lot of uneducated rowdies who see a chance for a bit of
a scrimmage.”</p>

<p>“Of course. Though I can’t deny—I was in the crowd
when Berkemeyer, the journeyman butcher, smashed Herr
Benthien’s window. He was like a panther.” Herr Gosch
spoke the last word with his teeth particularly close together,
and went on: “Oh, the thing has its fine side, that’s
certain. It is a change, at least, you know; something that
doesn’t happen every day. Storm, stress, violence—the tempest!
Oh, the people are ignorant, I know—still, my heart,
this heart of mine—it beats with theirs!” They were already
before the simple yellow-painted house on the ground
floor of which the sittings of the Assembly took place.</p>

<p>The room belonged to the beer-hall and dance-establishment
of a widow named Suerkringel; but on certain days it
was at the service of the gentlemen burgesses. The entrance
was through a narrow whitewashed corridor opening into the
restaurant on the right side, where it smelled of beer and
cooking, and thence through a handleless, lockless green door
so small and narrow that no one could have supposed such
a large room lay behind it. The room was empty, cold, and
barnlike, with a whitewashed roof in which the beams showed,
and whitewashed walls. The three rather high windows had
green-painted bars, but no curtains. Opposite them were the
benches, rising in rows like an amphitheatre, with a table at
the bottom for the chairman, the recording clerk, and the
Committee of the Senate. It was covered with a green cloth
and had a clock, documents, and writing materials on it.
On the wall opposite the door were several tall hat-racks
with hats and coats.</p>

<p>The sound of voices met the Consul and his companion as
they entered through the narrow door. They were the last
to come. The room was filled with burgesses, hands in their
trousers pockets, on their hips, or in the air, as they stood
together in groups and discussed. Of the hundred and thirty
members of the body at least a hundred were present. A
number of delegates from the country districts had been
obliged by circumstances to stop at home.</p>

<p>Near the entrance stood a group composed of two or three
small business men, a high-school teacher, the orphan asylum
“father,” Herr Mindermann, and Herr Wenzel, the popular
barber. Herr Wenzel, a powerful little man with a black
moustache, an intelligent face, and red hands, had shaved
the Consul that very morning; here, however, he stood on an
equality with him. He shaved only in the best circles; he
shaved almost exclusively the Möllendorpfs, Langhals, Buddenbrooks,
and Överdiecks, and he owed his vote in the Assembly
to his omniscience in city affairs, his sociability and
ease, and his remarkable power of decision at a division.</p>

<p>“Have you heard the latest, Herr Consul?” he asked with
round-eyed eagerness as his patron came up.</p>

<p>“What is there to hear, my dear Wenzel?”</p>

<p>“Nobody knew it this morning. Well, permit me to tell
you, Herr Consul, the latest is that the crowd are not going to
collect before the Town Hall, or in the market—they are
coming here to threaten the burgesses. Editor Rübsam has
stirred them up.”</p>

<p>“Is it possible?” said the Consul. He pressed through the
various groups to the middle of the room, where he saw his
father-in-law with Senators Dr. Langhals and James Möllendorpf.
“Is it true, gentlemen?” he asked, shaking hands
with them.</p>

<p>But there was no need to answer. The whole assemblage
was full of it: the peace-breakers were coming; they could be
heard already in the distance.</p>

<p>“<i>Canaille!</i>” said Lebrecht Kröger with cold scorn. He had
driven hither in his carriage. On an ordinary day the tall,
distinguished figure of the once famous cavalier showed the
burden of his eighty years; but to-day he stood quite erect
with his eyes half-closed, the corners of his mouth contemptuously
drawn down, and the points of his white moustaches
sticking straight up. Two rows of jewelled buttons sparkled
on his black velvet waistcoat.</p>

<p>Not far from this group was Heinrich Hagenström, a square-built,
fleshy man with a reddish beard sprinkled with grey,
a heavy watch-chain across his blue-checked waistcoat, and
his coat open over it. He was standing with his partner Herr
Strunck, and did not greet the Consul.</p>

<p>Herr Benthien, the draper, a prosperous looking man, had
a large group of gentlemen around him, to whom he was
circumstantially describing what had happened to his show-window.
“A brick, gentlemen, a brick, or at least half a
brick—<i>crack!</i> through it went and landed on a roll of green
rep. The rascally mob! Oh, the Government will have to
take it up! It’s their affair!”</p>

<p>And in every corner of the room unceasingly resounded
the voice of Herr Stuht from Bell-Founders’ Street. He had
on a black coat over his woollen shirt; and he so deeply
sympathized with the narrative of Herr Benthien that he never
stopped saying, in outraged accents, “Infamous, un-heard-of!”</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook found and greeted his old friend G. F.
Köppen, and then Köppen’s rival, Consul Kistenmaker. He
moved about in the crowd, pressed Dr. Grabow’s hand, and
exchanged a few words with Herr Gieseke the Fire Commissioner,
Contractor Voigt, Dr. Langhals, the Chairman, brother
of the Senator, and several merchants, lawyers, and teachers.</p>

<p>The sitting was not yet opened, but debate was already
lively. Everybody was cursing that pestilential scribbler, Editor
Rübsam; everybody knew he had stirred up the crowd—and
what for? The business in hand was to decide whether
they were to go on with the method of selecting representatives
by estates, or whether there was to be universal and
equal franchise. The Senate had already proposed the latter.
But what did the people want? They wanted these
gentlemen by the throats—no more and no less. It was the
worst hole they had ever found themselves in, devil take it!
The Senatorial Committee was surrounded, its members’ opinion
eagerly sought. They approached Consul Buddenbrook,
as one who should know the attitude of Burgomaster Överdieck;
for since Senator Doctor Överdieck, Consul Justus
Kröger’s brother-in-law, had been made President last year,
the Buddenbrooks were related to the Burgomaster; which
had distinctly enhanced the regard in which they were held.</p>

<p>All of a sudden the tumult began outside. Revolution had
arrived under the windows of the Sitting. The excited exchange
of opinions inside ceased simultaneously. Every man,
dumb with the shock, folded his hands upon his stomach and
looked at his fellows or at the windows, where fists were
being shaken in the air and the crowd was giving vent to
deafening and frantic yelling. But then, most astonishingly,
as though the offenders themselves had suddenly grown aghast
at their own behaviour, it became just as still outside as
in the hall; and in that deep hush, one word from the neighbourhood
of the lowest benches, where Lebrecht Kröger was
sitting, was distinctly audible. It rang through the hall,
cold, emphatic, and deliberate—the word “Canaille!” And,
like an echo, came the word “Infamous,” in a fat, outraged
voice from the other corner of the hall. Then the hurried,
trembling, whispering utterance of the draper Benthien:
“Gentlemen, gentlemen! Listen! I know the house. There
is a trap-door on to the roof from the attic. I used to shoot
cats through it when I was a lad. We can climb on to the next
roof and get down safely.”</p>

<p>“Cowardice,” hissed Gosch the broker between his teeth.
He leaned against the table with his arms folded and head
bent, directing a blood-curdling glance through the window.</p>

<p>“Cowardice, do you say? How cowardice? In God’s
name, sir, aren’t they throwing bricks? I’ve had enough
of that.”</p>

<p>The noise outside had begun again, but without reaching its
former stormy height. It sounded quieter and more continuous,
a prolonged, patient, almost comfortable hum, rising and
falling; now and then one heard whistles, and sometimes
single words like “principle” and “rights of citizens.” The
assembly listened respectfully.</p>

<p>After a while the chairman, Herr Dr. Langhals, spoke in a
subdued tone: “Gentlemen, I think we could come to some
agreement if we opened the meeting.”</p>

<p>But this humble suggestion did not meet with the slightest
support from anybody.</p>

<p>“No good in that,” somebody said, with a simple decisiveness
that permitted no appeal. It was a peasant sort of man,
named Pfahl, from the Ritzerau district, deputy for the village
of Little Schretstaken. Nobody remembered ever to
have heard his voice raised before in a meeting, but its very
simplicity made it weighty at the present crisis. Unafraid
and with sure political insight, Herr Pfahl had voiced the
feeling of the entire assemblage.</p>

<p>“God keep us,” Herr Benthien said despondently. “If we
sit on the benches we can be seen from outside. They’re
throwing stones—I’ve had enough of that.”</p>

<p>“And the cursed door is so narrow,” burst out Köppen the
wine-merchant, in despair. “If we start to go out, we’ll probably
get crushed.”</p>

<p>“Infamous, un-heard-of,” Herr Stuht intoned.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” began the Chairman urgently once more. “I
have to put before the Burgomaster in the next three days a
draft of to-day’s protocol, and the town expects its publication
through the press. I should at least like to get a vote
on that subject, if the sitting would come to order—”</p>

<p>But with the exception of a few citizens who supported the
chairman, nobody seemed ready to come to the consideration
of the agenda. A vote would have been useless anyhow—they
must not irritate the people. Nobody knew what they wanted,
so it was no good to offend them by a vote, in whatever direction.
They must wait and control themselves. The clock of
St. Mary’s struck half-past four.</p>

<p>They confirmed themselves and each other in this resolve
of patient waiting. They began to get used to the noise that
rose and fell outside, to feel quieter; to make themselves more
comfortable, to sit down on the lower benches and chairs.
The natural instinct toward industry, common to all these good
burghers, began to assert itself: they ventured to bargain a
little, to pick up a little business here and there. The brokers
sat down by the wholesale dealers. These beleaguered
gentlemen talked together like people shut in by a sudden
storm, who speak of other things, and now and then pause to
listen with respectful faces to the thunder. It was five o’clock—half-past
five. It was getting dark. Now and then somebody
sighed and said that the wife would be waiting with the
coffee—and then Herr Benthien would venture to mention the
trap-door. But most of them were like Herr Stuht, who said
fatalistically, shaking his head, “I’m too fat.”</p>

<p>Mindful of his wife’s request Johann Buddenbrook had
kept an eye on his father-in-law. He said to him: “This
little adventure isn’t disturbing you, is it, Father?”</p>

<p>Lebrecht Kröger’s forehead showed two swollen blue veins
under his white wig. He looked ill. One aristocratic old
hand played with the opalescent buttons on his waistcoat; the
other, with its great diamond ring, trembled on his knee.</p>

<p>“Fiddlesticks, Buddenbrook,” he said; but his voice showed
extreme fatigue. “I am sick of it, that’s all.” Then he betrayed
himself by suddenly hissing out: “Parbleu, Jean, this
infamous rabble ought to be taught some respect with a little
powder and shot. <i>Canaille!</i> Scum!”</p>

<p>The Consul hummed assent. “Yes, yes, you are right; it is
a pretty undignified affair. But what can we do? We must
keep our tempers. It’s getting late. They’ll go away after a
bit.”</p>

<p>“Where is my carriage? I desire my carriage,” said the
old man in a tone of command, suddenly quite beside himself.
His anger exploded; he trembled all over. “I ordered it
for five o’clock: where is it? This sitting will never be held.
Why should I stop any longer? I don’t care about being made
a fool of. My carriage! What are they doing to my coachman?
Go see after it, Buddenbrook.”</p>

<p>“My dear Father-in-Law, for heaven’s sake be calm. You
are getting excited. It will be bad for you. Of course I
will go and see after the carriage. I think myself we have
had enough of this. I will speak to the people and tell them
to go home.”</p>

<p>Close by the little green door he was accosted by Siegismund
Gosch, who grasped his arm with a bony hand and
asked in a gruesome whisper: “Whither away, Herr Consul?”</p>

<p>The broker’s face was furrowed with a thousand lines. His
pointed chin rose almost up to his nose, his face expressed
the most desperate resolution; his grey hair streamed distractedly
over brow and temples; his head was so drawn in
between his shoulders that he really almost achieved his ambition
of looking like a dwarf—and he rapped out: “You
behold me resolved to speak to the people.”</p>

<p>The Consul said: “No, let me do it, Gosch. I really know
more of them than you do.”</p>

<p>“Be it so,” answered the broker tonelessly. “You are a
bigger man than I.” And, lifting his voice, he went on:
“But I will accompany you, I will stand at your side, Consul
Buddenbrook. Let the wrath of the outraged people tear
me in pieces—”</p>

<p>“What a day, what a night!” he said as they went out.
There is no doubt he had never felt so happy before in his
life. “Ha, Herr Consul! Here are the people.”</p>

<p>They had gone down the corridor and outside the outer
door, where they stood at the top of three little steps that
went down to the pavement. The street was indeed a strange
sight. It was as still as the grave. At the open and lighted
windows of the houses round, stood the curious, looking down
upon the black mass of the insurgents before the Burgesses’
House. The crowd was not much bigger than that inside the
hall. It consisted of young labourers from the harbour and
granaries, servants, school pupils, sailors from the merchant
ships, and other people from the little streets, alleys, courts,
and rabbit-hutches round about. There were even two or three
women—who had probably promised themselves the same
millennium as the Buddenbrooks’ cook. A few of the insurrectionists,
weary of standing, had sat down with their feet in
the gutter and were eating sandwiches.</p>

<p>It was nearly six o’clock. Though twilight was well advanced,
the oil lamps hung unlighted above the street. This
fact, this open and unheard-of interruption of the regular
order, was the first thing that really made Consul Buddenbrook’s
temper rise, and was responsible for his beginning to
speak in a rather short and angry tone and the broadest of
pronunciations:</p>

<p>“Now then, all of you, what is the meaning of this foolishness?”</p>

<p>The picnickers sprang up from the sidewalk. Those in the
back ranks, beyond the foot-pavement, stood on their tip-toes.
Some navvies, in the service of the Consul, took off their caps.
They stood at attention, nudged each other, and muttered in
low tones, “’Tis Consul Buddenbrook. He be goin’ to talk.
Hold yer jaw, there, Chrishan; he can jaw like the devil
himself! Ther’s Broker Gosch—look! What a monkey he
is! Isn’t he gettin’ o’erwrought!”</p>

<p>“Carl Smolt!” began the Consul again, picking out and
fastening his small, deep-set eyes upon a bow-legged young
labourer of about two-and-twenty, with his cap in his hand
and his mouth full of bread, standing in front of the steps.
“Here, speak up, Carl Smolt! Now’s the time! I’ve been
here the whole afternoon—”</p>

<p>“Yes, Herr Consul,” brought out Carl Smolt, chewing
violently. “The thing is—ower—it’s a soart o’—we’re makkin’
a rivolution.”</p>

<p>“What kind of nonsense is that, then?”</p>

<p>“Lord, Herr Consul, ye knaw what that is. We’re not
satisfied wi’ things as they be. We demand another order o’
things; tain’t any more’n that—that’s what it is.”</p>

<p>“Now, listen, Carl Smolt and the rest of you. Whoever’s
got any sense will go home and not bother himself over any
revolutions, disturbing the regular order of things—”</p>

<p>“The sacred order,” interrupted Herr Gosch dramatically.</p>

<p>“The regular order, I say,” finished the Consul. “Why,
even the lamps aren’t lighted. That’s going too far with the
revolution.”</p>

<p>Carl Smolt had swallowed his mouthful by now, and, with
the people at his back, stood his ground and made some objections.</p>

<p>“Well, Herr Consul, ye may say that. But we’re only agin
the principle of the voate—”</p>

<p>“God in heaven, you ninny,” shouted the Consul, forgetting,
in his excitement, to speak dialect. “You’re talking the
sheerest nonsense—”</p>

<p>“Lord, Herr Consul,” said Carl Smolt, somewhat abashed,
“thet’s oall as it is. Rivolution it has to be. Ther’s rivolution
iverywheer, in Berlin, in Paris—”</p>

<p>“But, Smolt, what do you want? Just tell me that, if you
can.”</p>

<p>“Lord, Herr Consul, I say we wants a republic; that’s wat
I be sayin’.”</p>

<p>“But, you fool, you’ve got one already.”</p>

<p>“Well, Herr Consul, then we wants another.”</p>

<p>Some of the bystanders, who understood the matter better,
began to laugh rudely and heartily; and although few even
heard Carl’s answer, the laughter spread until the whole crowd
of republicans stood shaking good-naturedly. Some of the
gentlemen from inside the hall appeared at the window with
curious faces and beer-mugs in their hands. The only person
disappointed and pained by this turn of affairs was Siegismund
Gosch.</p>

<p>“Now, people,” shouted Consul Buddenbrook finally, “I
think the best thing for you all to do is to go home.”</p>

<p>Carl Smolt, quite crestfallen over the result he had brought
about, answered “That’s right, Herr Consul. Then things’ll
be quieted down. And Herr Consul doesn’t take it ill of me,
do’e, now? Good-bye, Herr Consul!”</p>

<p>The crowd began to disperse, in the best of humours.</p>

<p>“Wait a minute, Smolt,” shouted the Consul. “Have you
seen the Kröger carriage? the calèche from outside the Castle
Gate?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, Herr Consul. He’s here; he be driven up in some
court somewhere.”</p>

<p>“Then run quick and say he’s to come at once; his master
wants to go home.”</p>

<p>“Servant, Herr Consul,” and, throwing his cap on his head
and pulling the leather visor well down over his brows, Carl
Smolt ran with great swinging strides down the street.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">When</span> the Consul and Siegismund Gosch returned to the hall,
the scene was a more comfortable one than it had been a
quarter of an hour before. It was lighted by two large oil
lamps standing on the Committee table, in whose yellow light
the gentlemen sat or stood together, pouring out beer into
shining tankards, touching glasses and talking loudly, in the
gayest of humours. Frau Suerkringel, the widow, had consoled
them. She had loyally taken on her enforced guests
and given them good advice, recommending that they fortify
themselves for the siege, which might endure some while yet.
And thus she had profitably employed the time by selling a
considerable quantity of her light yet exhilarating beer. As
the others entered, the house-boy, in shirt-sleeves and good-natured
grin, was just bringing in a fresh supply of bottles.
While it was certainly late, too late to consider further the
revision of the Constitution, nobody seemed inclined to interrupt
the meeting and go home. It was too late for coffee,
in any case.</p>

<p>After the Consul had received congratulatory handshakes on
his success, he went up to his father-in-law. Lebrecht Kröger
was the only man in the room whose mood had not improved.
He sat in his place, cold, remote, and lofty, and answered the
information that the carriage would be around at once by
saying scornfully, in a voice that trembled more with bitterness
than age: “Then the mob permits me to go home?”</p>

<p>With stiff movements that no longer had in them anything
of the charm that had been his, he had his fur mantle put
about his shoulders, and laid his arm, with a careless “<i>Merci</i>,”
on that of the Consul, who offered to accompany him home.
The majestic coach, with two large lanterns on the box, stood
in the street, where, to the Consul’s great satisfaction, the
lamps were now being lighted. They both got in. Silent
and stiffly erect, with his eyes half-closed, Lebrecht
Kröger sat with the rug over his knees, the Consul at his right
hand, while the carriage rolled through the streets. Beneath
the points of the old man’s white moustaches two lines ran
down perpendicularly from the corners of his mouth to his
chin. He was gnawed by chagrin at the insult that had been
offered him, and he stared, weary and chilled, at the cushions
opposite.</p>

<p>There was more gayety in the streets than on a Sunday evening.
Obviously a holiday temper reigned. The people, delighted
at the successful outcome of the revolution, were out
in the gayest mood. There was singing. Here and there
youngsters shouted “Hurrah!” as the carriage drove past, and
threw their caps into the air.</p>

<p>“I really think, Father, you let the matter affect you too
much,” the Consul said. “When one thinks of it, what a tom-fool
business the whole thing was—simply a farce.” In
order to get some reply from the old man he went on to talk
about the revolution in lively tones. “When the propertyless
class begin to realize how little they serve their own ends—why,
good heavens, it’s the same everywhere. I was talking
this afternoon with Gosch the broker, a wonderful man, looking
at everything with the eyes of a poet and writer. You
see, Father, this revolution was made at the æsthetic tea-tables
of Berlin. Then the people take their own skin to market—for,
of course, they will be the ones to pay for it!”</p>

<p>“It would be a good thing if you would open the window
on your side,” said Herr Kröger.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook gave him a quick glance and let the
glass down hastily.</p>

<p>“Aren’t you feeling well, dear Father?” he asked anxiously.</p>

<p>“Not at all,” answered Lebrecht Kröger severely.</p>

<p>“You need food and rest,” the Consul said; and in order to
be doing something he drew up the fur rug closer about his
father-in-law’s knees.</p>

<p>Suddenly—the carriage was rolling through Castle Street—a
wretched thing happened. Fifteen paces from the Castle
Gate, in the half-dark, they passed a group of noisy and
happy street urchins, and a stone flew through the open window.
It was a harmless little stone, the size of a hen’s egg,
flung by the hand of some Chris Snut or Heine Voss to celebrate
the revolution; certainly not with any bad intent, and
probably not directed toward the carriage at all. It came
noiselessly through the window and struck Lebrecht Kröger in
his chest, which was covered with the thick fur rug. Then it
rolled down over the cover and fell upon the floor of the
coach.</p>

<p>“Clumsy fools!” said the Consul angrily. “Is everybody
out of their senses this evening? It didn’t hurt you, did it?”</p>

<p>Old Kröger was silent—alarmingly silent. It was too dark
in the carriage to see his expression. He sat straighter,
higher, stiffer than ever, without touching the cushions. Then,
from deep within him, slowly, coldly, dully, came the single
word: “Canaille.”</p>

<p>For fear of angering him further, the Consul made no answer.
The carriage clattered through the gate, and three
minutes later was in the broad avenue before the gilt-tipped
railings that bounded the Kröger domain. A drive bordered
with chestnut trees went from the garden gate up to the terrace;
and on either side of the gate a gilt-topped lantern was
burning brightly. The Consul saw his father-in-law’s face
by this light—it was yellow and wrinkled; the firm, contemptuous
set of the mouth had given way: it had changed to the
lax, silly, distorted expression of a very old man. The carriage
stopped before the terrace.</p>

<p>“Help me out,” said Lebrecht Kröger; but the Consul was
already out, had thrown back the rug, and offered his arm
and shoulder as a support. He led the old man slowly for a
few paces across the gravel to the white stone steps that went
up to the dining-room. At the foot of these, the old man
bent at the knee-joints. His head fell so heavily on his
breast that the lower jaw clashed against the upper. His
eyes rolled—grew dim; Lebrecht Kröger, the gallant, the
cavalier à-la-mode, had joined his fathers.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">A year</span> and two months later, on a misty, snowy morning in
January of the year 1850, Herr and Madame Grünlich sat at
breakfast with their little three-year-old daughter, in the
brown wainscoted dining-room, on chairs that cost twenty-five
marks apiece.</p>

<p>The panes of both windows were opaque with mist; behind
them one had vague glimpses of bare trees and bushes. A
red glow and a gentle, scented warmth came from the low,
green-tiled stove standing in a corner. Through the open door
next to it one could see the foliage-plants in the “pensée-room.”
On the other wall, half-drawn green stuff portières gave a
view of the brown satin salon and of a lofty glass door leading
on to a little terrace beyond. The cracks in this door
were carefully stopped with cotton-wool, and there was nothing
to be seen through its panes but the whitish-grey mist
beyond.</p>

<p>The snow-white cloth of woven damask on the round table
had an embroidered green runner across it, laid with gold-bordered
porcelain so translucent that it gleamed like mother-of-pearl.
The tea-kettle was humming. There was a finely
worked silver bread-basket in the shape of a curling leaf, with
slices and rolls of fine bread; under one crystal bell were
little balls of butter, under another different sorts of cheese,
white, yellow, and green. There was even a bottle of wine
standing before the master of the house; for Herr Grünlich
had a full breakfast every morning.</p>

<p>His whiskers were freshly curled, and at this early hour his
rosy face was rosier than ever. He sat with his back to the
salon, already arrayed in a black coat and light trousers with
a pattern of large checks, eating a grilled chop, in the English
manner. His wife thought this very elegant, but also
very disgusting—she had never brought herself to take it
instead of her usual breakfast of bread and butter and an
egg.</p>

<p>Tony was in her dressing-gown. She adored dressing-gowns.
Nothing seemed more elegant to her than a handsome
negligée, and as she had not been allowed to indulge this
passion in the parental house she was the more given to it
as a wife. She had three of these dainty clinging garments,
to the fashioning of which can go so much more taste and
fantasy than to a ball-gown. To-day she wore her dark-red
one. Its colour toned beautifully with the paper above the
wainscoting, and its large-flowered stuff, of a beautiful soft
texture, was embroidered all over with sprays of tiny glass
beads of the same colour, while row after row of red velvet
ribbons ran from neck to hem.</p>

<p>Her thick ash-blonde hair, with its dark-red velvet band,
curled about her brows. She had now, as she was herself
well aware, reached the highest point of her physical bloom;
yet her pretty, pouting upper lip retained just the naïve, provocative
expression of her childhood. The lids of her grey-blue
eyes were reddened with cold water. Her hands, the
white Buddenbrook hands, finely shaped if a little stumpy,
their delicate wrists caressed by the velvet cuffs of her dressing-gown,
handled her knife and fork and tea-cup with motions
that were to-day, for some reason or other, rather jerky and
abrupt. Her little daughter Erica sat near her in a high
chair. She was a plump child with short blonde hair, in a
funny, shapeless, knitted frock of pale-blue wool. She held
a large cup in both tiny hands, entirely concealing her face,
and drank her milk with little sighs of satisfaction.</p>

<p>Frau Grünlich rang, and Tinka, the housemaid, came from
the entry to take the child from her high chair and carry
her upstairs into the play-room. “You may take her walking
outside for a half-hour, Tinka,” said Tony. “But not longer;
and put on her thick jacket. It is very damp and foggy.”
She remained alone with her husband.</p>

<p>“You only make yourself seem absurd,” she said then, after
a silence, obviously continuing an interrupted conversation.
“What are your objections? Give me some reason. I can’t
be always attending to the child.”</p>

<p>“You are not fond of children, Antonie.”</p>

<p>“Fond of children, indeed! I have no time. I am taken
up with the housekeeping. I wake up with twenty things that
must be done, and I go to bed with forty that have not been
done.”</p>

<p>“There are two servants. A young woman like you—”</p>

<p>“Two servants. Good. Tinka has to wash up, to clean, to
serve. The cook is busy all the time. You have chops early
in the morning. Think it over, Grünlich. Sooner or later,
Erica must have a <i>bonne</i>, a governess.”</p>

<p>“But to get a governess for her so soon is not suited to our
means.”</p>

<p>“Our means! Goodness, you <i>are</i> absurd! Are we beggars?
Are we forced to live within the smallest limits we can? I
think I brought you in eighty thousand marks—”</p>

<p>“Oh, you and your eighty thousand marks—!”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know you like to make light of them. They were
of no importance to you because you married me for love!
Good. But do you still love me? You deliberately disregard
my wishes. The child is not to have a governess. And
I don’t even speak any more of the coupé, which we need quite
as much as we need food and drink. And why do you insist
on our living out here in the country, if it isn’t in accordance
with our means to keep a carriage so that we can go into society
respectably? Why do you never like it when I go in to
town? You would always rather just have me bury myself
out here, so I should never see a living soul. I think you
are very ill-tempered.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich poured some wine into his glass, lifted up
one of the crystal bells, and began on the cheese. He made
no reply.</p>

<p>“Don’t you love me any more?” repeated Tony. “Your
silence is so insulting, it drives me to remind you of a certain
day when you entered our landscape-room. You made a fine
figure of yourself! But from the very first day after our
marriage you have sat with me only in the evening, and that
only to read the paper. Just at first you showed some little
regard for my wishes. But that’s been over with for a long
while now. You neglect me.”</p>

<p>“And you? You are ruining me.”</p>

<p>“I? I am ruining you?”</p>

<p>“Yes, you are ruining me with your indolence, your extravagance,
and love of luxury.”</p>

<p>“Oh, pray don’t reproach me with my good upbringing!
In my parents’ house I never had to lift a finger. Now I
have hard work to get accustomed to the housekeeping; but I
have at least a right to demand that you do not refuse me the
ordinary assistance. Father is a rich man; he would never
dream that I could lack for service.”</p>

<p>“Then wait for this third servant until we get hold of some
of those riches.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you are wishing for my Father’s death. But I mean
that we are well-to-do people in our own right. I did not
come to you with empty hands.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich smiled an embarrassed and dejected smile,
although he was in the act of chewing his breakfast. He
made no other reply, and his silence bewildered Tony.</p>

<p>“Grünlich,” she said more quietly, “why do you smile and
talk about our ‘means’? Am I mistaken? Has business been
bad? Have you—?”</p>

<p>Just then somebody drummed on the corridor door, and
Herr Kesselmeyer walked in.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Herr Kesselmeyer</span> entered unannounced, as a friend of the
house, without hat or coat. He paused, however, near the
door. His looks corresponded exactly to the description Tony
had given to her Mother. He was slightly thick-set as to figure,
but neither fat nor lean. He wore a black, already somewhat
shiny coat, short tight trousers of the same material,
and a white waistcoat, over which went a long thin watch-chain
and two or three eye-glass cords. His clipped white
beard was in sharp contrast with his red face. It covered
his cheeks and left his chin and lips free. His mouth was
small and mobile, with two yellowish pointed teeth in the
otherwise vacant gum of his lower jaw, and he was pressing
these into his upper lip, as he stood absently by the door with
his hands in his trousers pockets and the black and white
down on his head waving slightly, although there was not the
least perceptible draught.</p>

<p>Finally he drew his hands out of his pockets, bowed, released
his lip, and with difficulty freed one of the eye-glass
cords from the confusion on his waistcoat. He lifted his
pince-nez and put it with a single gesture astride his nose.
Then he made the most astonishing grimaces, looked at the
husband and wife, and remarked: “Ah, ha!”</p>

<p>He used this expression with extraordinary frequency and
a surprising variety of inflections. He might say it with his
head thrown back, his nose wrinkled up, mouth wide open,
hands swishing about in the air, with a long-drawn-out, nasal,
metallic sound, like a Chinese gong; or he might, with still
funnier effect, toss it out, gently, <i>en passant</i>; or with any one
of a thousand different shades of tone and meaning. His <i>a</i>
was very clouded and nasal. To-day it was a hurried, lively
“Ah ha!” accompanied with a jerk of the head, that seemed
to arise from an unusually pleasant mood, and yet might not
be trusted to be so; for the fact was, Banker Kesselmeyer
never behaved more gaily than when he was dangerous. When
he jumped about emitting a thousand “Ah ha’s,” lifting his
glasses to his nose and letting them fall again, waving his
arms, chattering, plainly quite beside himself with light-headedness,
then you might be sure that evil was gnawing
at his inwards. Herr Grünlich looked at him blinking, with
unconcealed mistrust.</p>

<p>“Already—so early?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Ah, ha!” answered Herr Kesselmeyer, and waved one of
his small, red, wrinkled hands in the air, as if to say: “Patience,
there is a surprise coming.” “I must speak with you,
without any delay; I must speak with you.”</p>

<p>The words sounded irresistibly comic as he rolled each one
about before giving it out, with exaggerated movements of
his little toothless, mobile mouth. He rolled his <i>r</i>’s as if his
palate were greased. Herr Grünlich blinked more and more
suspiciously.</p>

<p>“Come and sit down, Herr Kesselmeyer,” said Tony. “I’m
glad you’ve come. Listen. You can decide between us.
Grünlich and I have been disagreeing. Now tell me: ought
a three-year-old child to have a governess or not?”</p>

<p>But Herr Kesselmeyer seemed not to be attending. He had
seated himself and was rubbing his stubbly beard with his
forefinger, making a rasping sound, his mouth as wide open
as possible, nose as wrinkled, while he stared over his
glasses with an indescribably sprightly air at the elegantly
appointed breakfast-table, the silver bread-basket, the label
on the wine-bottle.</p>

<p>“Grünlich says I am ruining him,” Tony continued.</p>

<p>Herr Kesselmeyer looked at her; then he looked at Herr
Grünlich; then he burst out into an astonishing fit of laughter.
“You are ruining him?—you? <i>You</i> are ruining him—that’s
it, is it? Oh good gracious, heavens and earth, you don’t
say! That <i>is</i> a joke. That is a tre-men-dous, tre-men-dous
joke.” He let out a stream of ha ha’s all run in together.</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich was plainly nervous. He squirmed on his
seat. He ran his long finger down between his collar and his
neck and let his golden whiskers glide through his hand.</p>

<p>“Kesselmeyer,” he said. “Control yourself, man. Are you
out of your head? Stop laughing! Will you have some
wine? Or a cigar? What are you laughing at?”</p>

<p>“What am I laughing at? Yes, yes, give me a glass of
wine, give me a cigar. Why am I laughing? So you think
your wife is ruining you?”</p>

<p>“She is very luxuriously inclined,” Herr Grünlich said irritably.</p>

<p>Tony did not contradict him. She leaned calmly back, her
hands in her lap on the velvet ribbons of her frock and her
pert upper lip in evidence: “Yes, I am, I know. I have it
from Mamma. All the Krögers are fond of luxury.”</p>

<p>She would have admitted in the same calm way that she
was frivolous, revengeful, or quick-tempered. Her strongly
developed family sense was instinctively hostile to conceptions
of free will and self-development; it inclined her rather
to recognize and accept her own characteristics wholesale,
with fatalistic indifference and toleration. She had, unconsciously,
the feeling that any trait of hers, no matter of what
kind, was a family tradition and therefore worthy of respect.</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich had finished breakfast, and the fragrance of
the two cigars mingled with the warm air from the stove.
“Will you take another, Kesselmeyer?” said the host. “I’ll
pour you out another glass of wine.—You want to see me?
Anything pressing? Is it important?—Too warm here, is
it? We’ll drive into town together afterward. It is cooler
in the smoking-room.” To all this Herr Kesselmeyer simply
shook his hand in the air, as if to say: “This won’t get us
anywhere, my dear friend.”</p>

<p>At length they got up; and, while Tony remained in the
dining-room to see that the servant-maid cleared away, Herr
Grünlich led his colleague through the “pensée-room,” with
his head bent, drawing his long beard reflectively through his
fingers. Herr Kesselmeyer rowed into the room with his
arms and disappeared behind him.</p>

<p>Ten minutes passed. Tony had gone into the salon to give
the polished nut-wood secretary and the curved table-legs her
personal attention with the aid of a gay little feather duster.
Then she moved slowly through the dining-room into the
living-room with dignity and marked self-respect. The Demoiselle
Buddenbrook had plainly not grown less important
in her own eyes since becoming Madame Grünlich. She held
herself very erect, chin in, and looked down at the world
from above. She carried in one hand her little lacquered key-basket;
the other was in the pocket of her gown, whose soft
folds played about her. The naïve expression of her mouth
betrayed that the whole of her dignity and importance were
a part of a beautiful, childlike, innocent game which she was
constantly playing with herself.</p>

<p>In the “pensée-room” she busied herself with a little brass
sprinkler, watering the black earth around her plants. She
loved her palms, they gave so much elegance to the room.
She touched carefully a young shoot on one of the thick
round stems, examined the majestically unfolded fans, and
cut away a yellow tip here and there with the scissors. Suddenly
she stopped. The conversation in the next room,
which had for several minutes been assuming a livelier tone,
became so loud that she could hear every word, though the
door and the portières were both heavy.</p>

<p>“Don’t shriek like that—control yourself, for God’s sake!”
she heard Herr Grünlich say. His weak voice could not
stand the strain, and went off in a squeak. “Take another
cigar,” he went on, with desperate mildness.</p>

<p>“Yes, thanks, with the greatest pleasure,” answered the
banker, and there was a pause while he presumably helped
himself. Then he said: “In short, will you or won’t you:
one or the other?”</p>

<p>“Kesselmeyer, give me an extension.”</p>

<p>“Ah, ha! No, no, my friend. There is no question of
an extension. That’s not the point now.”</p>

<p>“Why not? What is stirring you up to this? Be reasonable,
for heaven’s sake. You’ve waited this long.”</p>

<p>“Not a day longer, my friend. Yes, we’ll say eight days,
but not an hour longer. But can’t we rely any longer on—?”</p>

<p>“No names, Kesselmeyer.”</p>

<p>“No names. Good. But doesn’t some one rely any longer
on his estimable Herr Pa—”</p>

<p>“No hints, either. My God, don’t be a fool.”</p>

<p>“Very good; no hints, either. But have we no claim
any longer on the well-known firm with whom our credit
stands and falls, my friend? How much did it lose by the
Bremen failure? Fifty thousand? Seventy thousand? A
hundred thousand? More? The sparrows on the housetops
know that it was involved, heavily involved. Yesterday—well,
no names. Yesterday the well-known firm was good, and
it was unconsciously protecting you against pressure. To-day
its stock is flat—and B. Grünlich’s stock is the flattest of the
flat. Is that clear? Do you grasp it? You are the first
man to notice a thing like that. How are people treating
you? How do they look at you? Beck and Goudstikker are
perfectly agreeable, give you the same terms as usual? And
the bank?”</p>

<p>“They will extend.”</p>

<p>“You aren’t lying, are you? Oh, no! I know
they gave you a jolt yesterday—a very, very stimulating
jolt eh? You see? Oh, don’t be embarrassed. It is to
your interest, of course, to pull the wool over my eyes, so
that the others will be quiet. Hey, my dear friend? Well,
you’d better write to the Consul. I’ll wait a week.”</p>

<p>“A part payment, Kesselmeyer!”</p>

<p>“Part payment, rubbish! One accepts part payment to
convince oneself for the time of a debtor’s ability to pay.
Do I need to make experiments of that kind on you? I am
perfectly well-informed about your ability to pay. Ah, ha,
ah, ha! Part payment! That’s a very good joke.”</p>

<p>“Moderate your voice, Kesselmeyer. Don’t laugh all the
time in that cursed way. My position is so serious—yes,
I admit, it is serious. But I have such-and-such business in
hand—everything may still come out all right. Listen, wait
a minute: Give me an extension and I’ll sign it for twenty
per cent.”</p>

<p>“Nothing in it, nothing in it, my friend. Very funny,
very amusing. Oh, yes, I’m in favour of selling at the right
time. You promised me eight per cent, and I extended. You
promised me twelve and sixteen per cent, and I extended,
every time. Now, you might offer me forty per cent, and I
shouldn’t consider it—not for a moment. Since Brother Westfall
in Bremen fell on his nose, everybody is for the moment
freeing himself from the well-known firm and getting on a
sound basis. As I say, I’m for selling at the right time. I’ve
held your signatures as long as Johann Buddenbrook was
good—in the meantime I could write up the interest on the
capital and increase the per cent. But one only keeps a
thing so long as it is rising or at least keeping steady. When
it begins to fall, one sells—which is the same as saying I
want my capital.”</p>

<p>“Kesselmeyer, you are shameless.”</p>

<p>“Ah, ha, a-ha! Shameless, am I? That’s very charming,
very funny. What do you want? You must apply to your
father-in-law. The Credit Bank is raging—and you know you
are not exactly spotless.”</p>

<p>“No, Kesselmeyer. I adjure you to hear me quietly. I’ll
be perfectly frank. I confess that my situation is serious.
You and the Credit Bank are not the only ones—there are
notes of hand—everything seems to have gone to pieces at
once!”</p>

<p>“Of course—naturally. It is certainly a clean-up—a
liquidation.”</p>

<p>“No, Kesselmeyer; hear me out. Do take another cigar.”</p>

<p>“This one is not half finished. Leave me alone with your
cigars. Pay up.”</p>

<p>“Kesselmeyer, don’t let me smash!—You are a friend of
mine—you have eaten at my table.”</p>

<p>“And maybe you haven’t eaten at mine?”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes—but don’t refuse me credit now, Kesselmeyer!”</p>

<p>“Credit? It’s credit, now, is it? Are you in your senses?
A new loan?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Kesselmeyer, I swear to you— A little—a trifle. I
only need to make a few payments and advances here and
there to get on my feet again and restore confidence. Help
me and you will be doing a big business. As I said, I have
a number of affairs on hand. They may still all come out
right. You know how shrewd and resourceful I am.”</p>

<p>“I know what a numbskull you are! A dolt, a nincompoop,
my dear friend! Will you have the goodness to tell me what
your resourcefulness can accomplish at this stage? Perhaps
there is a bank somewhere in the wide world that will lend
you a shilling? Or another father-in-law? Ah, no; you
have already played your best card. You can’t play it twice.—With
all due respect, my dear fellow, and my highest regards.”</p>

<p>“Speak lower, devil take you!”</p>

<p>“You are a fool. Shrewd and resourceful, are you? Yes,
to the other chap’s advantage. You’re not scrupulous, I’ll
say that for you, but much good it’s done you! You have
played tricks, and wormed capital out of people by hook or
crook, just to pay me my twelve or sixteen per cent. You
threw your honour overboard without getting any return. You
have a conscience like a butcher’s dog, and yet you are nothing
but a ninny, a scapegoat. There are always such people—they
are too funny for words. Why is it you are so
afraid to apply to the person we mean with the whole story?
Isn’t it because there was crooked work four years ago?
Perhaps it wasn’t all quite straight—what? Are you afraid
that certain things—?”</p>

<p>“Very well, Kesselmeyer; I will write. But suppose he
refuses? Suppose he lets me down?”</p>

<p>“Oh—ah, ha! Then we will just have a bankruptcy, a
highly amusing little bankruptcy. That doesn’t bother me
at all. So far as I am concerned, I have about covered my
expenses with the interest you have scratched together, and I
have the priority with the assets. Oh, you wait; I shan’t
come short. I know everything pretty well, my good friend;
I have an inventory already in my pocket. Ah, ha! We
shall see that no dressing-gown and no silver bread-basket
gets away.”</p>

<p>“Kesselmeyer, you have sat at my table—”</p>

<p>“Oh, be quiet with your table! In eight days I’ll be back
for the answer. I shall walk in to town—the fresh air will
do me good. Good morning, my friend, good morning!”</p>

<p>And Herr Kesselmeyer seemed to depart—yes, he went.
She heard his odd, shuffling walk in the corridor, and imagined
him rowing along with his arms....</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich entered the “pensée-room” and saw Tony
standing there with the little watering-can in her hand. She
looked him in the face.</p>

<p>“What are you looking at? Why are you staring like
that?” he said to her. He showed his teeth, and made vague
movements in the air with his hands, and wiggled his body
from side to side. His rosy face could not become actually
pale; but it was spotted red and white like a scarlet-fever
patient’s.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Consul Johann Buddenbrook</span> arrived at the villa at two
o’clock in the afternoon. He entered the Grünlich salon in
a grey travelling-cloak and embraced his daughter with painful
intensity. He was pale and seemed older. His small
eyes were deep in their sockets, his large pointed nose stuck
out between the fallen cheeks, his lips seemed to have grown
thinner, and the beard under his chin and jaws half-covered
by his stiff choker and high neck-band,—he had lately ceased
to wear the two locks running from the temples half-way down
the cheeks—was as grey as the hair on his head.</p>

<p>The Consul had hard, nerve-racking days behind him.
Thomas had had a haemorrhage; the Father had learned of
the misfortune in a letter from Herr van der Kellen. He
had left his business in the careful hands of his clerk and
hurried off to Amsterdam. He found nothing immediately
dangerous about his son’s illness, but an open-air cure was
necessary, in the South, in Southern France; and as it fortunately
happened that a journey of convalescence had been
prescribed for the young son of the head of the firm, the
two young men had left for Pau as soon as Thomas was able
to travel.</p>

<p>The Consul had scarcely reached home again when he
was attacked by a fresh misfortune, which had for the moment
shaken his firm to its foundations and by which it had lost
eighty thousand marks at one blow. How? Discounted
cheques drawn on Westfall Brothers had come back to the
firm, liquidation having begun. He had not failed to cover
them. The firm had at once showed what it could do, without
hesitation or embarrassment. But that could not prevent
the Consul from experiencing all the sudden coldness, the
reserve, the mistrust at the banks, with “friends,” and among
firms abroad, which such an event, such a weakening of
working capital, was sure to bring in its train.</p>

<p>Well, he had pulled himself together, and had reviewed the
whole situation; had reassured, reinforced, made head. And
then, in the midst of the struggle, among telegrams, letters,
and calculations, this last blow broke upon him as well:
B. Grünlich, his daughter’s husband, was insolvent. In a
long, whining, confused letter he had implored, begged, and
prayed for an assistance of a hundred to a hundred and twenty
thousand marks. The Consul replied curtly and non-committally
that he would come to Hamburg to meet Herr Grünlich
and Kesselmeyer the banker, made a brief, soothing explanation
to his wife, and started off.</p>

<p>Tony received him in the salon. She was fond of receiving
visits in her brown silk salon, and she made no exception
now; particularly as she had a very profound impression of
the importance of the present occasion, without comprehending
in the least what it was about. She looked blooming and yet
becomingly serious, in her pale grey frock with its laces at
breast and wrists, its bell-shaped sleeves and long train, and
little diamond clasp at the throat. “How are you, Papa?
At last you have come to see us again. How is Mamma?
Is there good news from Tom? Take off your things, Father
dear. Will you dress? The guest-room is ready for you.
Grünlich is dressing.”</p>

<p>“Don’t call him, my child. I will wait for him here. You
know I have come for a talk with your husband—a very, very
serious talk, my dear Tony. Is Herr Kesselmeyer here?”</p>

<p>“Yes, he is in the pensée-room looking at the album.”</p>

<p>“Where is Erica?”</p>

<p>“Up in the nursery with Tinka. She is very well. She
is bathing her doll—of course, not in real water; I mean—she
is a wax-doll, she only—”</p>

<p>“Of course.” The Consul drew a deep breath and went
on: “Evidently you have not been informed as to—to the
state of affairs with your husband.”</p>

<p>He had sat down in an arm-chair near the large table,
and Tony placed herself at his feet on a little seat made of
three cushions on top of one another. The finger of her right
hand toyed gently with the diamond at her throat.</p>

<p>“No, Papa,” answered Tony. “I must confess I know
nothing. Heavens, I am a goose!—I have no understanding
at all. I heard Kesselmeyer talking lately to Grünlich—at
the end it seemed to me he was just joking again—he always
talks so drolly. I heard your name once or twice—”</p>

<p>“You heard my name? In what connection?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I know nothing of the connection, Papa. Grünlich
has been insufferably sulky ever since that day, I must say.
Until yesterday—yesterday he was in a good mood, and asked
me a dozen times if I loved him, and if I would put in a
good word for him with you if he had something to ask you.”</p>

<p>“Oh!”</p>

<p>“Yes, he told me he had written you and that you were coming
here. It is good you have. Everything is so queer.
Grünlich had the card-table put in here. There are a lot
of paper and pencils on it—for you to sit at, and hold a
council together.”</p>

<p>“Listen, my dear child,” said the Consul, stroking her
hair. “I want to ask you something very serious. Tell
me: you love your husband with your whole heart, don’t
you?”</p>

<p>“Of course, Papa,” said Tony with a face of childlike
hypocrisy—precisely the face of the child Tony when she was
asked: “You won’t tease the old doll-woman again, Tony?”
The Consul was silent a minute.</p>

<p>“You love him so much,” he asked again, “that you could
not live without him, under any circumstances, even if by
God’s will your situation should alter so that he could no
longer surround you with all these things?” And his hand
described a quick movement over the furniture and portières,
over the gilt clock on the étagère, and finally over her own
frock.</p>

<p>“Certainly, Papa,” repeated Tony, in the soothing tone she
nearly always used when any one spoke seriously to her. She
looked past her father out of the window, where a heavy veil
of rain was silently descending. Her face had the expression
children wear when some one tells them a fairy story and
then tactlessly introduces a generalization about conduct and
duty—a mixture of embarrassment and impatience, piety and
boredom.</p>

<p>The Consul looked at her without speaking for a minute.
Was he satisfied with her response? He had weighed everything
thoroughly, at home and during the journey.</p>

<p>It is comprehensible that Johann Buddenbrook’s first impulse
was to refuse his son-in-law any considerable payment.
But when he remembered how pressing—to use a mild word—he
had been about this marriage; when he looked back into
the past, and recalled the words: “Are you satisfied with
me?” with which his child had taken leave of him after the
wedding, he gave way to a burdensome sense of guilt against
her and said to himself that the thing must be decided according
to her feelings. He knew perfectly that she had
not made the marriage out of love, but he was obliged to
reckon with the possibility that these four years of life together
and the birth of the child had changed matters; that
Tony now felt bound body and soul to her husband and
would be driven by considerations both spiritual and worldly
to shrink from a separation. In such a case, the Consul
argued, he must accommodate himself to the surrender of
whatever sum was necessary. Christian duty and wifely feeling
did indeed demand that Tony should follow her husband
into misfortune; and if she actually took this resolve, he did
not feel justified in letting her be deprived of all the ease
and comfort to which she had been accustomed since childhood.
He would feel himself obliged to avert the catastrophe,
and to support B. Grünlich at any price. Yet the final
result of his considerations was the desire to take his daughter
and her child home with him and let Grünlich go his
own way. God forbid that the worst should happen!</p>

<p>In any case, the Consul invoked the pronouncement of the
law that a continued inability to provide for wife and children
justified a separation. But, before everything, he must
find out his daughter’s real feelings.</p>

<p>“I see,” he said, “my dear child, that you are actuated by
good and praiseworthy motives. But—I cannot believe that
you are seeing the thing as, unhappily, it really is—namely,
as actual fact. I have not asked what you would do in this
or that case, but what you to-day, now, will do. I do not
know how much of the situation you know or suspect. It
is my painful duty to tell you that your husband is obliged
to call his creditors together; that he cannot carry on his
business any longer. I hope you understand me.”</p>

<p>“Grünlich is bankrupt?” Tony asked under her breath, half
rising from the cushions and seizing the Consul’s hand quickly.</p>

<p>“Yes, my child,” he said seriously. “You did not know
it?”</p>

<p>“My suspicions were not definite,” she stammered. “Then
Kesselmeyer was not joking?” she went on, staring before
her at the brown carpet. “Oh, my God!” she suddenly uttered,
and sank back on her seat.</p>

<p>In that minute all that was involved in the word “bankrupt”
rose clearly before her: all the vague and fearful
hints which she had heard as a child. “Bankrupt”—that was
more dreadful than death, that was catastrophe, ruin, shame,
disgrace, misery, despair. “He is bankrupt,” she repeated.
She was so cast down and shaken by the fatal word that the
idea of escape, of assistance from her father, never occurred
to her. He looked at her with raised eyebrows, out of his
small deep-set eyes, which were tired and sad and full of an
unusual suspense. “I am asking you,” he said gently, “my
dear Tony, if you are ready to follow your husband into
misery?” He realized at once that he had used the hard word
instinctively to frighten her, and he added: “He can work
himself up again, of course.”</p>

<p>“Certainly, Papa,” answered she. But it did not prevent
her from bursting into tears. She sobbed into her batiste
handkerchief, trimmed with lace and with the monogram A. G.
She still wept just like a child; quite unaffectedly and without
embarrassment. Her upper lip had the most touching
expression.</p>

<p>Her father continued to probe her with his eyes. “That
is your serious feeling, my child?” he asked. He was as
simple as she.</p>

<p>“I must, mustn’t I?” she sobbed. “Don’t I have to—?”</p>

<p>“Certainly not,” he said. But with a guilty feeling he
added: “I would not force you to it, my dear Tony. If it
should be the case that your feelings did not bind you indissolubly
to your husband—”</p>

<p>She looked at him with uncomprehending, tear-streaming
eyes. “How, Papa?”</p>

<p>The Consul twisted and turned, and found a compromise.
“My dear child, you can understand how painful it would be
for me to have to tell you all the hardships and suffering
that would come about through the misfortune of your husband,
the breaking-up of the business and of your household.
I desire to spare you these first unpleasantnesses by
taking you and little Erica home with me. You would be
glad of that, I think?”</p>

<p>Tony was silent a moment, drying her tears. She carefully
breathed on her handkerchief and pressed it against her eyes
to heal their inflammation. Then she asked tn a firm tone,
without lifting her voice: “Papa, is Grünlich to blame? Is
it his folly and lack of uprightness that has brought him to
this?”</p>

<p>“Very probably,” said the Consul. “That is—no, I don’t
know, my child. The explanation with him and the banker
has not taken place yet.”</p>

<p>She seemed not to be listening. She sat crouched on her
three silk cushions, her elbow on her knee, her chin in her
hand, and with her head bowed looked dreamily into the
room.</p>

<p>“Ah, Papa,” she said softly, almost without moving her
lips, “wouldn’t it have been better—?”</p>

<p>The Consul could not see her face—but it had the expression
it often wore those summer evenings at Travemünde, as
she leaned at the window of her little room. One arm rested
on her Father’s knee, the hand hanging down limply. This
very hand was expressive of a sad and tender abandonment,
a sweet, pensive longing, travelling back into the past.</p>

<p>“Better?” asked Consul Buddenbrook. “If what, my
child?”</p>

<p>He was thoroughly prepared for the confession that it
would have been better had this marriage not taken place;
but Tony only answered with a sigh: “Oh, nothing.”</p>

<p>She seemed rapt by her thoughts, which had borne her so
far away that she had almost forgotten the “bankrupt.” The
Consul felt himself obliged to utter what he would rather
only have confirmed.</p>

<p>“I think I guess your thoughts, Tony,” he said, “and I
don’t on my side hesitate to confess that in this hour I regret
the step that seemed to me four years ago so wise and
advisable. I believe, before God, I am not responsible. I
think I did my duty in trying to give you an existence suitable
to your station. Heaven has willed otherwise. You
will not believe that your Father played lightly and unreflectingly
with your happiness in those days! Grünlich came
to us with the best recommendations, a minister’s son, a
Christian and a cosmopolitan man. Later I made business
inquiries, and it all sounded as favourable as possible. I
examined the connections. All that is still very dark; and the
explanation is yet to come. But you don’t blame me—?”</p>

<p>“No, Papa—how can you say such a thing? Come, don’t
take it to heart, poor Papa! You look pale. Shall I give
you a little cordial?” She put her arm around his neck and
kissed his cheek.</p>

<p>“Thank you, no,” he said. “There, there! It is all right.
Yes, I have bad days behind me. I have had much to try
me. These are all trials sent from God. But that does not
help my feeling a little guilty toward you, my child. Everything
depends on the question I have already asked you.
Speak openly, Tony. Have you learned to love your husband
in these years of marriage?”</p>

<p>Tony wept afresh; and covering her eyes with both hands, in
which she held the batiste handkerchief, she sobbed out:
“Oh, what are you asking me, Papa? I have never loved him—he
has always been repulsive to me. You know that.”</p>

<p>It would be hard to say what went on in Johann Buddenbrook.
His eyes looked shocked and sad; but he bit his lips
hard together, and great wrinkles came in his cheeks, as they
did when he had brought a piece of business to a successful
conclusion. He said softly: “Four years—”</p>

<p>Tony’s tears ceased suddenly. With her damp handkerchief
in her hand, she sat up straight on her seat and said
angrily: “Four years! Yes! Sometimes, in those four
years, he sat with me in the evening and read the paper.”</p>

<p>“God gave you a child,” said the Father, moved.</p>

<p>“Yes, Papa. And I love Erica very much, although Grünlich
says I am not fond of children. I would not be parted
from her, that is certain. But Grünlich—no! Grünlich, no.
And now he is bankrupt. Ah, Papa, if you will take Erica
and me home—oh, gladly.”</p>

<p>The Consul compressed his lips again. He was extremely
well satisfied. But the main point had yet to be touched upon;
though, by the decision Tony showed, he did not risk much by
asking.</p>

<p>“You seem not to have thought it might be possible to do
something, to get help. I have already said to you that I
do not feel myself altogether innocent of the situation, and—in
case you should expect—hope—I might intervene, to prevent
the failure and cover your husband’s debts, the best I
could, and float his business—”</p>

<p>He watched her keenly, and her bearing filled him with
satisfaction. It expressed disappointment.</p>

<p>“How much is it?” she asked.</p>

<p>“What is that to the point, my child? A very large sum.”
And Consul Buddenbrook nodded several times, as though the
weight of the very thought of such a sum swung his head
back and forth. “I should not conceal from you,” he went
on, “that the firm has suffered losses already quite apart from
this affair, and that the surrender of a sum like this would be
a blow from which it would recover with difficulty. I do not
in any way say this to—”</p>

<p>He did not finish. Tony had sprung up, had even taken
a few steps backward, and with the wet handkerchief still
in her hand she cried: “Good! Enough! Never!” She
looked almost heroic. The words “the firm” had struck home.
It is highly probable that they had more effect than even
her dislike of Herr Grünlich. “You shall not do that, Papa,”
she went on, quite beside herself. “Do you want to be bankrupt
too? Never, never!”</p>

<p>At this moment the hall door opened a little uncertainly
and Herr Grünlich entered.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook rose, with a movement that meant:
“That’s settled.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Herr Grünlich’s</span> face was all mottled with red; but he had
dressed carefully in a respectable-looking black coat and pea-green
trousers like those in which he had made his first visits
in Meng Street. He stood still, with his head down, looking
very limp, and said in a weak exhausted sort of voice:
“Father?”</p>

<p>The Consul bowed, not too cordially, and straightened his
neck-cloth with an energetic movement.</p>

<p>“Thank you for coming,” said Herr Grünlich.</p>

<p>“It was my duty, my friend,” replied the Consul. “But
I am afraid it will be about all I can do for you.”</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich threw him a quick look and seemed to grow
still more limp.</p>

<p>“I hear,” the Consul went on, “that your banker, Herr Kesselmeyer,
is awaiting us—where shall the conference be held?
I am at your service.”</p>

<p>“If you will be so good as to follow me,” Herr Grünlich
murmured. Consul Buddenbrook kissed his daughter on the
forehead and said, “Go up to your child, Antonie.”</p>

<p>Then he went, with Herr Grünlich fluttering in front of
and behind him to open the portières, through the dining-room
into the living-room.</p>

<p>Herr Kesselmeyer stood at the window, the black and white
down softly rising and falling upon his cranium.</p>

<p>“Herr Kesselmeyer, Herr Consul Buddenbrook, my father-in-law,”
said Herr Grünlich, meekly. The Consul’s face was
impassive. Herr Kesselmeyer bowed with his arms hanging
down, both yellow teeth against his upper lip, and said
“Pleasure to meet you, Herr Consul.”</p>

<p>“Please excuse us for keeping you waiting, Kesselmeyer,”
said Herr Grünlich. He was not more polite to one than to
the other. “Pray sit down.”</p>

<p>As they went into the smoking-room, Herr Kesselmeyer
said vivaciously: “Have you had a pleasant journey? Ah,
rain? Yes, it is a bad time of year, a dirty time. If we
had a little frost, or snow, now—but rain, filth—very, very
unpleasant.”</p>

<p>“What a queer creature!” thought the Consul.</p>

<p>In the centre of the little room with its dark-flowered wall-paper
stood a sizable square table covered with green baize.
It rained harder and harder; it was so dark that the first
thing Herr Grünlich did was to light the three candles on the
table. Business letters on blue paper, stamped with the names
of various firms, torn and soiled papers with dates and signatures,
lay on the green cloth. There were a thick ledger
and a metal inkstand and sand-holder, full of well-sharpened
pencils and goose-quills.</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich did the honours with the subdued and tactful
mien of a man greeting guests at a funeral. “Dear Father,
do take the easy-chair,” he said. “Herr Kesselmeyer, will
you be so kind as to sit here?”</p>

<p>At last they were settled. The banker sat opposite the
host, the Consul presided on the long side of the table. The
back of his chair was against the hall door.</p>

<p>Herr Kesselmeyer bent over, released his upper lip, disentangled
a glass from his waistcoat and stuck it on his nose,
which he wrinkled for the purpose, and opened his mouth
wide. Then he scratched his stubbly beard with an ugly
rasping noise, put his hands on his knees, and remarked in a
sprightly tone, jerking his head toward the piles of papers:
“Well, there we have the whole boiling.”</p>

<p>“May I look into matters a little more closely?” asked the
Consul, taking up the ledger. But Herr Grünlich suddenly
stretched out his hands over the table—long, trembling hands
marked with high blue veins—and cried out in a voice that
trembled too: “A moment, Father. Just a moment. Let me
make just a few explanations. Yes, you will get an insight
into everything—nothing will escape your glance; but, believe
me, you will get an insight into the situation of an unfortunate,
not a guilty man. You see in me a man who fought
unwearied against fate, but was finally struck down. I am
innocent of all—”</p>

<p>“We shall see, my friend, we shall see,” said the Consul,
with obvious impatience; and Herr Grünlich took his hands
away and resigned himself to his fate.</p>

<p>Then there were long dreadful minutes of silence. The
three gentlemen sat close together in the flickering candle-light,
shut in by the four dark walls. There was not a sound
but the rustling of the Consul’s papers and the falling rain
outside.</p>

<p>Herr Kesselmeyer stuck his thumbs in the arm-holes of
his waistcoat and played piano on his shoulders with his
fingers, looking with indescribable jocosity from one to the
other. Herr Grünlich sat upright in his chair, hands on the
table, staring gloomily before him, and now and then stealing
an anxious glance at his father-in-law out of the tail of
his eye. The Consul examined the ledger, followed columns
of figures with his finger, compared dates, and did indecipherable
little sums in lead-pencil on a scrap of paper. His worn
features expressed astonishment and dismay at the conditions
into which he now “gained an insight.” Finally he laid his
left arm on Herr Grünlich’s and said with evident emotion:
“You poor man!”</p>

<p>“Father,” Herr Grünlich broke out. Two great tears rolled
down his cheeks and ran into the golden whiskers. Herr
Kesselmeyer followed their course with the greatest interest.
He even raised himself a little, bent over, and looked his
vis-à-vis in the face, with his mouth open. Consul Buddenbrook
was moved. Softened by his own recent misfortunes,
he felt himself carried away by sympathy; but he controlled
his feelings.</p>

<p>“How is it possible?” he said, with a sad head-shake.
“In so few years—”</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s simple,” answered Herr Kesselmeyer, good-temperedly.
“One can easily ruin oneself in four years.
When we remember that it took an even shorter time for
Westfall Brothers in Bremen to go smash—” The Consul
stared at him, but without either seeing or hearing him.
He himself had not expressed his own actual thoughts, his real
misgivings. Why, he asked himself with puzzled suspicion,
why was this happening now? It was as clear as daylight
that, just where he stood to-day, B. Grünlich had stood two
years, three years before. But his credit had been inexhaustible,
he had had capital from the banks, and for his undertakings
continual endorsement from sound houses like Senator
Bock and Consul Goudstikker. His paper had passed as
current as banknotes. Why now, precisely now—and the head
of the firm of Johann Buddenbrook knew well what he meant
by this “now”—had there come this crash on all sides, this
complete withdrawal of credit as if by common consent, this
unanimous descent upon B. Grünlich, this disregard of all
consideration, all ordinary business courtesy? The Consul
would have been naïve indeed had he not realized that the
good standing of his own firm was to the advantage of his
son-in-law. But had the son-in-law’s credit so entirely, so
strikingly, so exclusively depended upon his own? Had
Grünlich himself been nothing at all? And the information
the Consul had had, the books he had examined—? Well,
however the thing stood, his resolution was firmer than ever
not to lift a finger. They had reckoned without their host.</p>

<p>Apparently B. Grünlich had known how to make it appear
that he was connected with the firm of Buddenbrook—well,
this widely-circulated error should be set right once for all.
And this Kesselmeyer—he was going to get a shock too. The
clown! Had he no conscience whatever? It was very plain
how shamelessly he had speculated on the probability that he,
Johann Buddenbrook, would not let his daughter’s husband
be ruined; how he had continued to finance Grünlich long
after he was unsound, and exacted from him an ever crueller
rate of interest.</p>

<p>“Now,” he said shortly, “let us get to the point. If I am
asked as a merchant to say frankly what I think, I am obliged
to say that if the situation is that of an unfortunate man,
it is also in a great degree that of a guilty one.”</p>

<p>“Father!” stammered Herr Grünlich.</p>

<p>“The name does not come well to my ears,” said the Consul,
quickly and harshly. “Your demands on Herr Grünlich
amount, sir”—turning for a moment to the banker—“to sixty
thousand marks, I believe?”</p>

<p>“With the back interest they come to sixty-eight thousand
seven hundred and fifty-five marks and fifteen shillings,” answered
Herr Kesselmeyer pleasantly.</p>

<p>“Very good. And you would not be inclined under any
circumstances to be patient for a longer time?”</p>

<p>Herr Kesselmeyer simply began to laugh. He laughed with
his mouth open, in spasms, without a trace of scorn, even
good-naturedly, looking at the Consul as though he were inviting
him to join in the fun.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook’s little deep eyes clouded over and
began to show red rims around them that ran down to the
cheek-bones. He had only asked for form’s sake, being aware
that a postponement on the part of one creditor would not
materially alter the situation. But the manner of this man’s
refusal was mortifying indeed. With a motion of the hand
he pushed away everything from in front of him, laid the
pencil down with a jerk on the table, and said, “Then I must
express myself as unwilling to concern myself any further
with this affair.”</p>

<p>“Ah, ha!” cried Herr Kesselmeyer, shaking his hands in
the air. “That’s the way to talk. The Herr Consul will
settle everything out of hand—we shan’t have any long
speeches. Without more ado.” Johann Buddenbrook did
not even look at him.</p>

<p>“I cannot help you, my friend.” He turned calmly to
Herr Grünlich. “Things must go on as they have begun.
Pull yourself together, and God will give you strength and
consolation. I must consider our interview at an end.”</p>

<p>Herr Kesselmeyer’s face took on a serious expression which
was vastly becoming to it. But then he nodded encouragingly
to Herr Grünlich. The latter sat motionless at the table,
only wringing his hands so hard that the fingers cracked.</p>

<p>“Father—Herr Consul,” he said, with a trembling voice.
“You will not—you cannot desire my ruin. Listen. It is
a matter of a hundred and twenty thousand marks in all—you
can save me! You are a rich man. Regard it as you like—as
a final arrangement, as your daughter’s inheritance, as a
loan subject to interest. I will work—you know I am keen
and resourceful—”</p>

<p>“I have spoken my last word,” said the Consul.</p>

<p>“Permit me—may I ask whether you could if you would?”
asked Herr Kesselmeyer, looking at him through his glasses,
with his nose wrinkled up. “I suggest to the Consul that this
would be a most advantageous time to display the strength
of the firm of Buddenbrook.”</p>

<p>“You would do well, sir, to leave the good name of my
house to me. I do not need to throw my money in the nearest
ditch in order to show how good my credit is.”</p>

<p>“Dear me, no, of course not—ditch, ah, ha!—Ditch is very
funny. But doesn’t the gentleman think the failure of his
son-in-law places his own credit in a bad light—er—ah—?”</p>

<p>“I can only recommend you again to remember that my
credit in the business world is entirely my own affair,” said
the Consul.</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich looked at his banker helplessly and began
afresh: “Father! I implore you again: think what you are
doing. Is it a question of me alone? I—oh, I myself might
be allowed to perish. But your daughter, my wife, whom I
love, whom I won after such a struggle—and our child—both
innocent children—are they to be brought low as well? No,
Father, I will not bear it; I will kill myself. Yes, I would
kill myself with this hand. Believe me—and may heaven
pardon you if it will.”</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook leaned back in his arm-chair quite
white, with a fast-beating heart. For the second time the
emotions of this man played upon him, and their expression
had the stamp of truth; again he heard, as when he told
Herr Grünlich the contents of his daughter’s letter from
Travemünde, the same terrible threat, and again there shuddered
through him all the fanatical reverence of his generation
for human feelings, which yet had always been in conflict
with his own hard practical sense. But the attack lasted
no longer than a moment. “A hundred thousand marks,” he
repeated to himself; and then he said quietly and decisively:
“Antonie is my daughter. I shall know how to protect her
from unmerited suffering.”</p>

<p>“What do you mean by that?” asked Herr Grünlich, slowly
stiffening.</p>

<p>“That you will see,” answered the Consul. “For the present
I have nothing to add.” And he got up, pushed back
his chair, and turned toward the door.</p>

<p>Herr Grünlich sat silent, stiff, irresolute; his mouth opened
and closed without a word coming out. But the sprightliness
of Herr Kesselmeyer returned at this conclusive action of the
Consul. Yes, it got the upper hand entirely, it passed all
bounds, it became frightful. The glasses fell from his nose,
which went skyward, while his little mouth, with the two
triangular yellow teeth, looked as though it were splitting.
He rowed with his little red hands in the air, the fuzz on his
head waved up and down, his whole face, with its bristly
white beard distorted and grotesque with uncontrolled hilarity—had
grown the colour of cinnamon.</p>

<p>“Ah, ha, ha, ah, ha!” he yelled, his voice cracking. “I
find that in the last—degree—funny! You ought to consider,
Consul Buddenbrook, before you consign to the grave such a
valuable—such a supreme specimen of a son-in-law. Anything
so shrewd, so resourceful as he is, won’t be born upon
God’s wide earth a second time. Aha! Four years ago—when
the knife was at our throat, the rope around our neck—suddenly
we made a match with Fräulein Buddenbrook, and
spread the news on ’Change, even before it had actually come
off! Congratulations, my dear friend; my best respects!”</p>

<p>“Kesselmeyer,” groaned Herr Grünlich, making spasmodic
motions with his hands, as though waving off an evil spirit.
He rushed into one corner of the room, where he sat down
and buried his face in his hands. The ends of his whiskers
lay on his shanks, and he rocked his knees up and down in
his emotion.</p>

<p>“How did we do that?” went on Herr Kesselmeyer. “How
did we actually manage to catch the little daughter and the
eighty thousand marks? O-ho, ah, ha! That is easy. Even
if one has no more shrewdness and resourcefulness than a
tallow candle, it is easy! You show the saviour Papa nice,
pretty, clean books, in which everything is put in the right
way—only that they don’t quite correspond with the plain
fact—for the plain fact is that three-quarters of the dowry
is already debts.”</p>

<p>The Consul stood at the door deathly pale, the handle in
his hand. Shivers ran up and down his back. He seemed
to be standing in this little room lighted by the flickering
candles, between a swindler and an ape gone mad with spite.</p>

<p>“I despise your words, sir,” he brought out with uncertain
emphasis. “I despise your wild utterances the more that they
concern me as well. I did not hand my daughter over light-headedly
to misfortune; I informed myself as to my son-in-law’s
prospects. The rest was God’s will.”</p>

<p>He turned—he would not hear any more—he opened the
door. But Herr Kesselmeyer shrieked after him: “Aha, inquiries?
Where? Of Bock? Of Goudstikker? Of Petersen?
Of Massmann and Timm? They were all in it. They
were all in it up to their necks. They were all uncommonly
pleased to be secured by the wedding—” The Consul
slammed the door behind him.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Dora</span> the cook, about whose honesty Tony had had her doubts,
was busy in the dining-room.</p>

<p>“Ask Madame Grünlich to come down,” ordered the Consul.
“Get yourself ready, my child,” he said as Tony appeared.
He went with her into the salon. “Get ready as
soon as possible, and get Erica ready too. We are going to
the city. We shall sleep to-night in a hotel and travel home
to-morrow.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Papa,” Tony said. Her face was red; she was distracted
and bewildered. She made unnecessary and hurried
motions about her waist, as if not knowing where to begin
and not grasping the actuality of the occasion.</p>

<p>“What shall I take, Papa?” she asked distractedly. “Everything?
All our clothes? One trunk or two? Is Grünlich
really bankrupt? Oh, my God! But can I take my jewelry,
then? Papa, the servants must leave—I cannot pay them.
Grünlich was to have given me housekeeping money to-day or
to-morrow.”</p>

<p>“Never mind, my child; things will all be arranged here.
Just take what is necessary in a small trunk. They can send
your own things after you. Hurry, do you hear?”</p>

<p>Just then the portières were parted and Herr Grünlich came
into the salon. With quick steps, his arms outstretched, his
head on one side, with the bearing of a man who says: “Here
I am; kill me if you will,” he hurried to his wife and sank
down on his knees right in front of her. His appearance was
pitiable. His golden whiskers were dishevelled, his coat
crumpled, his neck-cloth askew, his collar open; little drops
stood upon his forehead.</p>

<p>“Antonie!” he said. “Have you a heart that can feel?
Hear me. You see before you a man who will be utterly
ruined, if—yes, who will die of grief, if you deny him your
love. Here I lie; can you find it in your heart to say to me:
‘I despise you—I am leaving you’?”</p>

<p>Tony wept. It was just the same as that time in the landscape-room.
Once more she saw his anguished face, his imploring
eyes directed upon her; again she saw, and was moved
to see, that this pleading, this anguish, were real and unfeigned.</p>

<p>“Get up, Grünlich,” she said, sobbing. “Please, please
get up.” She tried to raise his shoulders. “I do not despise
you. How can you say such a thing?” Without knowing
what else she should say, she turned helplessly to her father.
The Consul took her hand, bowed to his son-in-law, and
moved with her toward the hall door.</p>

<p>“You are going?” cried Herr Grünlich, springing to his
feet.</p>

<p>“I have told you already,” said the Consul, “that I cannot
be responsible for leaving my innocent child in misfortune—and
I might add that you cannot, either. No, sir, you have
misprized the possession of my daughter. You may thank
your Creator that the child’s heart is so pure and unsuspicious
that she parts from you without repulsion. Farewell.”</p>

<p>But here Herr Grünlich lost his head. He could have borne
to hear of a brief parting—of a return and a new life and
perhaps the saving of the inheritance. But this was too much
for his powers of self-command, his shrewdness and resource.
He might have taken the large bronze plaque that stood on the
étagère, but he seized instead a thin painted vase with flowers
that stood next it, and threw it on the ground so that it
smashed into a thousand bits.</p>

<p>“Ha, good, good!” he screamed. “Get along with you!
Did you think I’d whine after you, you goose? You are very
much mistaken, my darling. I only married you for your
money; and it was not nearly enough, so you may as
well go home. I’m through with you—through—through—through!”</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook ushered his daughter silently out.
Then he turned, went up to Herr Grünlich, who was standing
in the window with his hands behind his back staring
out at the rain, touched him softly on the shoulder, and spoke
with soft admonishment. “Pull yourself together. <i>Pray!</i>”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER X</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">A chastened</span> mood reigned for some time at the old house
in Meng Street after Madame Grünlich and her little daughter
returned thither to take up their abode. The family
went about rather subdued and did not speak much about “it,”
with the exception of the chief actor in the affair, who, on
the contrary, talked about “it” inexhaustibly, and was entirely
in her element.</p>

<p>Tony had moved with Erica into the rooms in the second
storey which her parents had occupied in the time of the elder
Buddenbrooks. She was a little disappointed to find that it
did not occur to her Papa to engage a servant for her, and
she had rather a pensive half-hour when he gently explained
that it would be fitting for her to live a retired life and give
up the society of the town: for though, he said, according to
human judgments she was an innocent victim of the fate
which God had sent to try her, still her position as a divorced
wife made a very quiet life advisable, particularly at first.
But Tony possessed the gift of adaptability. She could adjust
herself with ease and cheerfulness to any situation. She
soon grew charmed with her rôle of the injured wife returned
to the house of her fathers; wore dark frocks, dressed her
ash-blonde hair primly like a young girl’s, and felt richly
repaid for her lack of society by the weight she had acquired
in the household, the seriousness and dignity of her new
position, and above all by the immense pleasure of being
able to talk about Herr Grünlich and her marriage and to
make general observations about life and destiny, which she
did with the utmost gusto.</p>

<p>Not everybody gave her this opportunity, it is true. The
Frau Consul was convinced that her husband had acted correctly
and out of a sense of duty; but when Tony began to
talk, she would put up her lovely white hand and say: “<i>Assez</i>,
my child; I do not like to hear about it.”</p>

<p>Clara, now twelve years old, understood nothing, and
Cousin Clothilde was just as stupid. “Oh, Tony!”—that was
all she could say, with drawling astonishment. But the young
wife found an attentive listener in Mamsell Jungmann, who
was now thirty-five years old and could boast of having grown
grey in the service of the best society. “You don’t need to
worry, Tony, my child,” she would say. “You are young;
you will marry again.” And she devoted herself to the upbringing
of little Erica, telling her the same stories, the same
memories of her youth, to which the Consul’s children had
listened fifteen years before; and, in particular, of that uncle
who died of hiccoughs at Marienwerder “because his heart
was broken.”</p>

<p>But it was with her father that Tony talked most and
longest. She liked to catch him after the noonday meal or
in the morning at early breakfast. Their relations had
grown closer and warmer; for her feeling had been heretofore
one of awe and respect rather than affection, on account
of his high position in the town, his piety, his solid, stern
ability and industry. During that talk in her own salon he
had come humanly near to her, and it had filled her with
pride and emotion to be found worthy of that serious and
confidential consultation. He, the infallible parent, had put
the decision into her hands: he had confessed, almost humbly,
to a sense of guilt. Such an idea would never have entered
Tony’s head of itself; but since he said it, she believed it,
and her feeling for him had thereby grown warmer and tenderer.
As for the Consul, he believed himself bound to make
up to his daughter for her misfortune by redoubled love and
care.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook had himself taken no steps against
his untrustworthy son-in-law. Tony and her Mother did hear
from him, in the course of conversation, what dishonourable
means Grünlich had used to get hold of the eighty thousand
marks; but the Consul was careful to give the matter no publicity.
He did not even consider going to the courts with it.
He felt wounded in his pride as a merchant, and he wrestled
silently with the disgrace of having been so thoroughly taken
in.</p>

<p>But he pressed the divorce suit energetically as soon as
the failure of Grünlich came out, which it soon did, thereby
causing no inconsiderable losses to certain Hamburg firms.</p>

<p>It was this suit, and the thought that she herself was a
principal in it, that gave Tony her most delicious and indescribable
feelings of importance.</p>

<p>“Father,” she said—for in these conversations she never
called him “Papa”—“Father, how is our affair going on?
Do you think it will be all right? The paragraph is perfectly
clear; I have studied it. ‘Incapacity of the husband to
provide for his family’: surely they will say that is quite
plain. If there were a son, Grünlich would keep him—”</p>

<p>Another time she said: “I have thought a great deal about
the four years of my marriage, Father. That was certainly
the reason the man never wanted us to live in the town, which
I was so anxious to do. That was the reason he never liked
me even to be in the town or go into society. The danger
was much greater there than in Eimsbüttel, of my hearing
somehow or other how things stood. What a scoundrel!”</p>

<p>“We must not judge, my child,” answered the Consul.</p>

<p>Or, when the divorce was finally pronounced: “Have you
entered it in the family papers, Father? No? Then I’d
better do it. Please give me the key to the secretary.” With
bustling pride she wrote, beneath the lines she had set there
four years ago under her name: “This marriage was dissolved
by law in February, 1850.” Then she put away the pen and
reflected a minute.</p>

<p>“Father,” she said, “I understand very well that this affair
is a blot on our family history. I have thought about it a
great deal. It is exactly as if there were a spot of ink in
the book here. But never mind. That is my affair. I will
erase it. I am still young. Don’t you think I am still quite
pretty? Though Frau Stuht, when she saw me again, said to
me: ‘Oh, Heavens, Mme. Grünlich, how old you’ve grown!’
Well, I certainly couldn’t remain all my life the goose I was
four years ago! Life takes one along with it. Anyhow, I
shall marry again. You will see, everything can be put right
by a good marriage.”</p>

<p>“That is in God’s hand, my child. It is most unfitting to
speak of such things.”</p>

<p>Tony began at this time to use very frequently the expression
“Such is life”; and with the word “life” she would open her
eyes wide with a charming serious look, indicating the deep
insight she had acquired into human affairs and human
destinies.</p>

<p>Thomas returned from Pau in August of that year. The
dining-table was opened out again, and Tony had a fresh
audience for her tale. She loved and looked up to her
brother, who had felt for her pain in that departure from
Travemünde, and she respected him as the future head of
the firm and the family.</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” he said; “we’ve both of us gone through things,
Tony.”</p>

<p>The corner of his eyebrow went up, and his cigarette moved
from one corner of his mouth to the other: his thoughts were
probably with the little flower-girl with the Malay face, who
had lately married the son of her employer and now herself
carried on the shop in Fishers’ Lane.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook, though still a little pale, was strikingly
elegant. The last few years had entirely completed his
education. His hair was brushed so that it stood out in two
clumps above his ears, and his moustache was trimmed in the
French mode, with sharp points that were stiffened with the
tongs and stuck straight out. His stocky broad-shouldered
figure had an almost military air.</p>

<p>His constitution was not of the best; the blue veins showed
too plainly at the narrow temples, and he had a slight tendency
to chills, which good Dr. Grabow struggled with in vain.
In the details of his physical appearance—the chin, the nose,
and especially the hands, which were wonderfully true to the
Buddenbrook type—his likeness to his grandfather was more
pronounced than ever.</p>

<p>He spoke French with a distinctly Spanish accent, and
astonished everybody by his enthusiasm for certain modern
writers of a satiric and polemic character. Broker Gosch
was the only person in town who sympathized with his tastes.
His father strongly reprehended them.</p>

<p>But the Father’s pride and joy in his eldest son were plain
to be seen; they shone in the Consul’s eyes. He welcomed
him joyfully home as his colleague in the firm, and himself
began to work with increased satisfaction in his office—especially
after the death of old Madame Kröger, which took
place at the end of the year.</p>

<p>The old lady’s loss was one to be borne with resignation.
She had grown very old, and lived quite alone at the end.
She went to God, and the firm of Buddenbrooks received a
large sum of money, a round hundred thousand thaler, which
strengthened the working capital of the business in a highly
desirable way.</p>

<p>The Consul’s brother-in-law Justus, weary of continual business
disappointments, as soon as he had his hands on his
inheritance settled his business and retired. The gay son of
the cavalier à-la-mode was not a happy man. He had been
too careless, too generous to attain a solid position in the
mercantile world. But he had already spent a considerable
part of his inheritance; and now Jacob, his eldest son, was
the source of fresh cares to him.</p>

<p>The young man had become addicted to light, not to say
disreputable, society in the great city of Hamburg. He had
cost his father a huge sum in the course of years, and when
Consul Kröger refused to give him more, the mother, a weak,
sickly woman, sent money secretly to the son, and wretched
clouds had sprung up between husband and wife.</p>

<p>The final blow came at the very time when B. Grünlich was
making his failure: something happened at Dalbeck and Company
in Hamburg, where Jacob Kröger worked. There had
been some kind of dishonesty. It was not talked about;
no questions were asked of Justus Kröger; but it got about
that Jacob had a position as travelling man in New York
and was about to sail. He was seen once in the town before
his boat left, a foppishly dressed, unwholesome-looking
youth. He had probably come hither to get more money
out of his mother, besides the passage money his father sent
him.</p>

<p>It finally came about that Justus spoke exclusively of “my
son,” as though he had none but the one heir, his second son,
Jürgen, who would certainly never be guilty of a false step,
but who seemed on the other hand to be mentally limited.
He had had difficulty getting through the High School; after
which he spent some time in Jena, studying law—evidently
without either pleasure or profit.</p>

<p>Johann Buddenbrook felt keenly the cloud on his wife’s
family and looked with the more anxiety to the future of his
own children. He was justified in placing the utmost confidence
in the ability and earnestness of his older son. As
for Christian, Mr. Richardson had written that he showed an
unusual gift for acquiring English, but no genuine interest
in the business. He had a great weakness for the theatre and
for other distractions of the great city. Christian himself
wrote that he had a longing to travel and see the world. He
begged eagerly to be allowed to take a position “over there”—which
meant in South America, perhaps in Chile. “That’s
simply love of adventure,” the Consul said, and told him
to remain with Mr. Richardson for another year and acquire
mercantile experience. There followed an exchange of letters
on the subject, with the result that in the summer of 1851
Christian Buddenbrook sailed for Valparaiso, where he had
hunted up a position. He travelled direct from England, without
coming home.</p>

<p>So much for his two sons. As for Tony, the Consul was
gratified to see with what self-possession she defended her
position in the town as a Buddenbrook born; for as a divorced
wife she had naturally to overcome all sorts of prejudice
on the part of the other families.</p>

<p>“Oh!” she said, coming back with flushed cheeks from a
walk and throwing her hat on the sofa in the landscape-room.
“This Juliet Möllendorpf, or Hagenström—or Semmlinger—whatever
she is, the creature!—Imagine, Mamma!
She doesn’t speak. She doesn’t say ‘How do you do’: She
waits for me to speak first. What do you say to that? I
passed her in Broad Street with my head up and looked
straight at her.”</p>

<p>“You go too far, Tony. There is a limit to everything.
Why shouldn’t you speak first? You are the same age, and
she is a married woman, just as you were.”</p>

<p>“Never, Mamma! Never under the shining sun! Such
rag-tag and bob-tail!”</p>

<p>“<i>Assez</i>, my love. Such vulgar expressions—”</p>

<p>“Oh, it makes me feel perfectly beside myself!”</p>

<p>Her hatred of the upstart family was fed by the mere
thought that the Hagenströms might now feel justified in looking
down on her—especially considering the present good
fortune of the clan. Old Heinrich had died at the beginning
of 1851, and his son Hermann—he of the lemon buns and
the boxes on the ear—was doing a very brilliant business
with Herr Strunk as partner. He had married, less than a
year later, the daughter of Consul Huneus, the richest man in
town, who had made enough out of his business to leave
each of his three children two million marks. Hermann’s
brother Moritz, despite his lung trouble, had a brilliant career
as student, and had now settled down in the town to practise
law. He had a reputation for being able, witty, and literary,
and soon acquired a considerable business. He did not
look like the Semmlingers, having a yellow face and pointed
teeth with wide spaces between.</p>

<p>Even in the family Tony had to take care to hold her head
up. Uncle Gotthold’s temper toward his fortunate step-brother
had grown more mild and resigned now that he had
given up business and spent his time care-free in his modest
house, munching lozenges out of a tin box—he loved sweets.
Still, considering his three unmarried daughters, he could not
have failed to feel a quiet satisfaction over Tony’s unfortunate
venture; and his wife, born Stüwing, and his three
daughters, twenty-six, twenty-seven, and twenty-eight years
old, showed an exaggerated interest in their cousin’s misfortune
and the divorce proceedings; more, in fact, than they had
in her betrothal and wedding. When the “children’s Thursdays”
began again in Meng Street after old Madame Kröger’s
death, Tony found it no easy work to defend herself.</p>

<p>“Oh, heavens, you poor thing!” said Pfiffi, the youngest,
who was little and plump, with a droll way of shaking herself
at every word. A drop of water always came in the
corner of her mouth when she spoke. “Has the decree been
pronounced? Are you exactly as you were before?”</p>

<p>“Oh, on the contrary,” said Henriette, who like her elder
sister, was extraordinarily tall and withered-looking. “You
are much worse off than if you had never married at all.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Friederike chimed in. “Then it is ever so much
better never to have married at all.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, dear Friederike,” said Tony, erecting her head,
while she bethought herself of a telling and clever retort.
“You make a mistake there. Marriage teaches one to know
life, you see. One is no longer a silly goose. And then I
have more prospect of marrying again than those who have
never married at all!”</p>

<p>“Oh!” cried the others with one voice. They said it with
a long hissing intake of breath which made it sound very
sceptical indeed.</p>

<p>Sesemi Weichbrodt was too good and tactful even to mention
the subject. Tony sometimes visited her former teacher
in the little red house at Millbrink No. 7. It was still occupied
by a troop of girls, though the boarding-school was
slowly falling out of fashion. The lively old maid was also
invited to Meng Street on occasion to partake of a haunch of
venison or a stuffed goose. She always raised herself on tip-toe
to kiss Tony on the forehead, with a little exploding noise.
Madame Kethelsen, her simple sister, had grown rapidly
deaf and had understood almost nothing of Tony’s affair.
She still laughed her painfully hearty laugh on the most unsuitable
occasions, and Sesemi still felt it necessary to rap
on the table and cry “Nally!”</p>

<p>The years went on. Gradually people forgot their feelings
over Tony’s affair. She herself would only think now and
then of her married life, when she saw on Erica’s healthy,
hearty little face some expression that reminded her of Bendix
Grünlich. She dressed again in colours, wore her hair in the
old way, and made the same old visits into society.</p>

<p>Still, she was always glad that she had the chance to be
away from the town for some time in the summer. The Consul’s
health made it necessary for him to visit various cures.</p>

<p>“Oh, what it is to grow old!” he said. “If I get a spot of
coffee on my trousers and put a drop of cold water on it, I
have rheumatism. When one is young, one can do anything.”
He suffered at times also from spells of dizziness.</p>

<p>They went to Obersalzbrunn, to Ems and Baden-Baden, to
Kissingen, whence they made a delightful and edifying journey
to Nuremberg and Munich and the Salzburg neighbourhood,
to Ischl and Vienna, Prague, Dresden, Berlin, and home
again. Madame Grünlich had been suffering from a nervous
affection of the digestion, and was obliged to take a strenuous
cure at the baths; but nevertheless she found the journey a
highly desirable change, for she did not conceal her opinion
that it was a little slow at home.</p>

<p>“Heavens, yes—you know how it is, Father,” she would say,
regarding the ceiling with a thoughtful air. “Of course, I
have learned what life is like—but just for that reason it is
rather a dull prospect for me to be always sitting here at
home like a stupid goose. I hope you don’t think I mean I
do not like to be with you, Papa. I ought to be whipped if I
did, it would be so ungrateful. But I only mean life is like
that, you know.”</p>

<p>The hardest thing she had to bear was the increasing piety
of her parents’ home. The Consul’s religious fervour grew
upon him in proportion as he himself felt the weight of years
and infirmity; and his wife too, as she got older, began to
find the spiritual side to her taste. Prayers had always been
customary in the Buddenbrook house, but now for some time
the family and the servants had assembled mornings and evenings
in the breakfast-room to hear the Master read the
Bible. And the visits of ministers and missionaries increased
more and more from year to year. The godly patrician house
in Meng Street, where, by the way, such good dinners were to
be had, had been known for years as a spiritual haven to the
Lutheran and reformed clergy and to both foreign and home
missions. From all quarters of the Fatherland came long-haired,
black-coated gentlemen, to enjoy the pious intercourse
and the nourishing meals, and to be furnished with the sinews
of their spiritual warfare. The ministers of the town went
in and out as friends of the house.</p>

<p>Tom was much too discreet and prudent even to let any one
see him smile; but Tony mocked quite openly. She even, sad
to say, made fun of these pious worthies whenever she had a
chance.</p>

<p>Sometimes when the Frau Consul had a headache, it was
Tony’s turn to play the housekeeper and order the dinner.
One day, when a strange clergyman whose appetite was the
subject of general hilarity, was a guest, Tony mischievously
ordered “bacon broth,” the famous local dish: a bouillon
made with sour cabbage, in which was served the entire
meal—ham, potatoes, beet-root, cauliflower, peas, beans,
pears, sour plums, and goodness knows what, juice and all—a
dish which nobody except those born to it could possibly eat.</p>

<p>“I do hope you are enjoying the soup, Herr Pastor,” she
said several times. “No? Oh, dear, who would have thought
it?” And she made a very roguish face, and ran her tongue
over her lips, a trick she had when she thought of some prank
or other.</p>

<p>The fat man laid down his spoon resignedly and said
mildly: “I will wait till the next course.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” the Frau Consul said hastily, “there is a little
something afterwards.” But a “next course” was unthinkable,
after this mighty dish; and despite the French toast and
apple jelly which finished the meal, the reverend guest had
to rise hungry from table, while Tony tittered, and Tom, with
fine self-control, lifted one eyebrow.</p>

<p>Another time Tony stood with Stina, the cook, in domestic
discourse in the entry, when Pastor Mathias from Kannstadt,
who was stopping a few days in the house, came back from
a walk and rang at the outer door. Stina ran to open, with
her peasant waddle, and the Pastor, with the view of saying
an edifying word and testing her a little, asked in a friendly
tone: “Do you love the Master?”</p>

<p>Perhaps he had the idea of giving her a tip if she professed
herself on the side of the Saviour.</p>

<p>“Lord, Herr Pastor,” said Stina, trembling and blushing,
with wide eyes. “Which one do Herr Pastor mean? T’ old
un or t’ young un?” Madame Grünlich did not fail to tell the
story at the table, so that even the Frau Consul burst out into
her sputtering Kröger laugh. The Consul, however, looked
down in displeasure at his plate.</p>

<p>“A misunderstanding,” said Herr Mathias, highly embarrassed.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">What</span> follows happened in the late summer of 1855, on a
Sunday afternoon. The Buddenbrooks were sitting in the
landscape-room waiting for the Consul, who was below dressing
himself. They had arranged to take a holiday walk to a
pleasure garden outside the City Gate, where, all except Clara
and Clothilde, they were to drink coffee and, if the weather
permitted, go for a row on the river. Clara and Clothilde
went always on Sunday evenings to the house of a friend,
where they knitted stockings for little negro children.</p>

<p>“Papa is ridiculous,” Tony said, using her habitual strong
language. “Can he never be ready on time? He sits and
sits and sits at his desk: something or other <i>must</i> be finished—good
heavens, perhaps it is something really necessary, I don’t
know. But I don’t believe we should actually become bankrupt
if he put down his pen a quarter of an hour sooner.
Well, when it is already ten minutes too late, he remembers
his appointment and comes upstairs, always two steps at a
time, although he knows he will get palpitation at the top.
And it is like that at every company, before every expedition.
Isn’t it possible for him to leave himself time enough? And
stop soon enough? It’s so irresponsible of him; you ought
to talk to him about it, Mamma.” She sat on the sofa beside
her Mother, dressed in the changeable silk that was fashionable
that summer; while the Frau Consul wore a heavy grey
ribbed silk trimmed with black lace, and a cap of lace and
stiffened tulle, tied under her chin with a satin bow. The
lappets of her cap fell down on her breast. Her smooth hair
was still inexorably reddish-blond in colour, and she held a
work-bag in both her white delicately veined hands. Tom was
lounging in an easy-chair beside her smoking his cigarette,
while Clara and Clothilde sat opposite each other at the
window. It was a mystery how much good and nourishing
food that poor Clothilde could absorb daily without any result
whatever! She grew thinner and thinner, and her shapeless
black frock did not conceal the fact. Her face was as long,
straight, and expressionless as ever, her hair as smooth and
ash-coloured, her nose as straight, but full of large pores and
getting thick at the end.</p>

<p>“Don’t you think it will rain?” said Clara. The young
girl had the habit of not elevating her voice at the end of a
question and of looking everybody straight in the face with a
pronounced and rather forbidding look. Her brown frock
was relieved only by a little stiff turn-over collar and cuffs.
She sat straight up, her hands in her lap. The servants had
more respect for her than for any one else in the family; it
was she who held the services morning and evening now, for
the Consul could not read aloud without getting a feeling of
oppression in the head.</p>

<p>“Shall you take your new Baschlik?” she asked again.
“The rain will spoil it. It would be a pity. I think it
would be better to put off the party.”</p>

<p>“No,” said Tom. “The Kistenmakers are coming. It
doesn’t matter. The barometer went down so suddenly—.
There will be a storm—it will pour, but not last long. Papa
is not ready yet; so we can wait till it is over.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul raised a protesting hand. “You think
there will be a severe storm, Tom? You know I am afraid of
them.”</p>

<p>“No,” Tom answered. “I was down at the harbour this
morning talking to Captain Kloot. He is infallible. There
will be a heavy rain, but no wind.”</p>

<p>The second week in September had brought belated hot
weather with it. There was a south-west wind, and the city
suffered more than in July. A strange-looking dark blue sky
hung above the roof-tops, pale on the skyline as it is in the
desert. After sunset a sultry breath, like a hot blast from an
oven, streamed out of the small houses and up from the pavement
of the narrow streets. To-day the wind had gone round
to the west, and at the same time the barometer had fallen
sharply. A large part of the sky was still blue, but it was
slowly being overcast by heavy grey-blue clouds that looked
like feather pillows.</p>

<p>Tom added: “It would be a good thing if it did rain, I
think. We should collapse if we had to walk in this atmosphere.
It is an unnatural heat. Hotter than it ever was in
Pau.”</p>

<p>Ida Jungmann, with little Erica’s hand in hers, came into
the room. The child looked a droll little figure in her stiffly
starched cotton frock; she smelled of starch and soap. She
had Herr Grünlich’s eyes and his rosy skin, but the upper
lip was Tony’s.</p>

<p>The good Ida was already quite grey, almost white, although
not out of the forties. It was a trait of her family:
the uncle that died had had white hair at thirty. But her
little brown eyes looked as shrewd and faithful as ever. She
had been now for twenty years with the Buddenbrooks, and
she realized with pride that she was indispensable. She oversaw
kitchen, larders, linen and china cupboards, she made the
most important purchases, she read to little Erica, made
clothes for her dolls, and fetched her from school, with a
slice of French bread, to take her walking on the Mill-wall.
Every lady said to Frau Consul or her daughter: “What a
treasure your Mamsell is, my dear! Goodness, she is worth
her weight in gold! Twenty years—and she will be useful at
sixty and more; these wiry people are. What faithful eyes
she has! I envy you, my love.” But Ida Jungmann was very
reserved. She knew her own position, and when some ordinary
nurse-girl came and sat down with her charge on the
same bench and tried to enter into conversation, Ida Jungmann
would say: “There is a draught here, Erica,” and get up and
go.</p>

<p>Tony drew her little daughter to her and kissed the rosy
cheeks, and the Frau Consul stretched out her hand with rather
an absent smile; for she was looking anxiously at the sky,
which grew darker and darker. Her left hand fingered the
sofa pillows nervously, and her light eyes wandered restlessly
to the window.</p>

<p>Erica was allowed to sit next her Grandmother, and Ida
sat up straight on a chair and began to knit. Thus all waited
silently for the Consul. The air was heavy. The last bit of
blue had disappeared; the dark grey sky lowered heavy and
swollen over them. The colours in the room changed, the
yellow of furniture and hangings and the tones of the landscapes
on the walls were all quenched, like the gay shades in
Tony’s frock and the brightness of their eyes. Even the west
wind, which had been playing in the churchyard of St. Mary’s
and whirling the dust around in the darkening street, was
suddenly quiet.</p>

<p>This breathless moment of absolute calm came without
warning, like some unexpected, soundless, awful event. The
sultriness grew heavier, the atmosphere seemed to increase its
weight in a second; it oppressed the brain, it rested on the
heart, it prevented the breathing. A swallow flew so low over
the pavement that its wings touched. And this pressure
that one could not lift, this tension, this growing weight
on the whole organism, would have become unbearable had it
lasted even the smallest part of a second longer, if at its height
there had not come a relief, a release—a little break somewhere,
soundless, yet perceptible; and at the same moment,
without any premonitory drops, the rain fell down in sheets,
filling the gutters and overflowing the pavements.</p>

<p>Thomas, whose illness had taught him to pay attention to
his nerves, bent over in this second, made a motion toward
his head, and flung away his cigarette. He looked around the
circle to see if the others had felt anything. He thought his
Mother had, perhaps; the others did not seem to be aware.
The Frau Consul was looking out now into the thick-streaming
rain, which quite hid the church from view; she sighed “Thank
God.”</p>

<p>“There,” said Tony, “that will cool the air in two minutes.
But the drops will be hanging on the trees outside—we can
drink coffee in the verandah. Open the window, Tilda.”</p>

<p>The noise of the rain grew louder. It almost roared.
Everything pattered, streamed, rushed, foamed. The wind
came up and blew the thick veils of water, tore them apart,
and flung them about. It grew cooler every minute.</p>

<p>Lina, the maid-servant, came running through the hall and
burst so suddenly into the room that Ida Jungmann called out
sharply: “I say, what do you mean—?” Lina’s expressionless
blue eyes were wide open, her jaws worked without making
a sound—</p>

<p>“Oh, Frau Consul,” she got out, at last. “Come, come
quick! oh, what a scare—”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Tony said, “she’s probably broken something again.
Very likely the good porcelain. Oh, these servants of yours,
Mamma!”</p>

<p>But the girl burst out: “Oh, no, Ma’am Grünlich—if that’s
all it was!—It’s the Master—I were bringing him his boots,
and there he sits and can’t speak, on his chair, and I says to
myself, there’s something wrong there; the Herr Consul—”</p>

<p>“Get Grabow,” cried Thomas and ran out of the room.</p>

<p>“My God—oh, my God!” cried the Frau Consul, putting
her hands to her face and hurrying out.</p>

<p>“Quick, get a wagon and fetch Grabow,” Tony repeated
breathlessly.</p>

<p>Everybody flew downstairs and through the breakfast-room
into the bedroom.</p>

<p>But Johann Buddenbrook was already dead.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">PART FIVE</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">Good</span> evening, Justus,” said the Frau Consul. “How are
you? Sit down.”</p>

<p>Consul Kröger embraced her tenderly and shook hands
with his elder niece, who was also present in the dining-room.
He was now about fifty-five years old, and wore a heavy round
whisker as well as his moustache, leaving his chin free. It
was quite grey. His scanty hair was carefully combed over
the broad pink expanse of his skull. The sleeve of his elegant
frock-coat had a broad mourning band.</p>

<p>“Do you know the latest, Betsy?” he asked. “Yes, Tony,
this will particularly interest you. To put it briefly, our
property outside the Castle Gate is sold—guess to whom?
Not to one man, but to two: for the house is to be pulled down,
and a hedge run through diagonally, and Benthien will build
himself a dog-kennel on the right side, and Sorenson one on
the left. God bless us!”</p>

<p>“Whoever heard the like?” said Frau Grünlich, folding her
hands in her lap and gazing up at the ceiling. “Grandfather’s
property! Well, now the estate is all haggled up. Its great
charm was its extent: there was really too much of it, but that
was what made it elegant. The large garden, all the way
down to the Trave, the house set far back with the drive,
and the chestnut avenue. So it is to be divided. Benthien
will stand in front of one door and Sorenson in front of the
other. I say, ‘God bless us,’ too, Uncle Justus! I suppose
there is nobody grand enough these days to occupy the whole
thing. It is good that Grandpapa is not here to see it.”</p>

<p>The sense of mourning still lay too heavily on the air for
Tony to give expression to her outraged feelings in livelier or
stronger terms. It was the day on which the will had been
read, two weeks after the death of the Consul, at half-past
five in the afternoon. Frau Consul Buddenbrook had invited
her brother to Meng Street, in order that he might talk over
the provisions made by the deceased with Thomas and with
Herr Marcus the confidential clerk. Tony had announced her
intention to be present at the settlements. This attention, she
said, she owed to the firm as well as to the family, and she
took pains to give the meeting the character of a family council.
She had closed the curtains, and despite the two oil
lamps on the green-covered dining-table, drawn out to its full
extent, she had lighted all the candles in the great gilded
candelabrum as well. And, though there was no particular
need of them, she had put on the table a quantity of writing
paper and sharpened pencils.</p>

<p>Tony’s black frock gave her figure a maidenly slimness.
She, of them all, was perhaps most deeply moved by the death
of the Consul, to whom she had drawn so close in the last
months that even to-day the thought of him made her burst out
twice in bitter weeping; yet the prospect of this family council,
this solemn little conference in which she could bear a worthy
part, had power to flush her pretty cheek, brighten her glance,
and give her motions dignity and even joy. The Frau Consul,
on the other hand, worn with anxiety and grief and the thousand
formalities of the funeral and the mourning, looked ailing.
Her face, framed in the black lace of her cap-strings,
seemed paler, and her light-blue eyes were tired and dull.
But there was not a single white hair to be seen in her smooth
red-blonde coiffure. Was this still the Parisian tonic, or was
it the wig? Mamsell Jungmann alone knew, and she would
not have betrayed the secret even to the other ladies of the
family.</p>

<p>They sat at the end of the table and waited for Herr Marcus
and Thomas to come out of the office. The painted statues
seemed to stand out white and proud on their pedestals
against the sky-blue background.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul said: “The thing is—I bade you come,
my dear Justus—in short, it is about Clara, the child. My
beloved husband left to me the choice of a guardian for
her—she will need one for three years. I know you do not
want to be overburdened with responsibilities. You have
duties to your wife and sons—”</p>

<p>“My son, Betsy.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, we must be Christlike and merciful, Justus. As
we forgive our debtors, it says. Think of our gracious Father
in Heaven.”</p>

<p>Her brother looked at her, a little aggrieved. Such turns
of phrase had come in the past only from the mouth of the
Consul.</p>

<p>“Enough,” she went on. “There are as good as no obligations
connected with this service of love. I should like to
ask you to accept it.”</p>

<p>“Gladly, Betsy; of course, I’ll do it with pleasure. May I
not see my ward? A little too serious, isn’t she, the good
child—?” Clara was called. She slowly appeared, all black
and pallid, her movements melancholy and full of restraint.
She had spent the time since her father’s death in her room
praying almost without ceasing. Her dark eyes were immobile;
she seemed frozen with grief and awe.</p>

<p>Uncle Justus the gallant stepped up to her, bowed as he
pressed her hand, and murmured something appropriate. She
went out, after receiving the Frau Consul’s kiss on her stiff
lips.</p>

<p>“How is Jürgen?” began the Frau Consul again. “Does it
agree with him in Wismar?”</p>

<p>“Very well,” answered Justus Kröger, sitting down again
with a shrug of the shoulders. “I think he has found his
place now. He is a good lad, Betsy, a lad of principle, but—after
he had failed twice in the examination, it seemed
best— He did not like the law himself, and the position in
the post-office at Wismar is quite suitable. Tell me—I hear
Christian is coming?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Justus, he is coming. May God watch over him on
the seas! I wrote to him the next day after Jean’s death, but
he hasn’t even had the letter yet, and then he will take about
two months with the sailing-vessel after that. But he must
come, Justus; I must see him. Tom says Jean would never
have been willing for Christian to give up his position in Valparaiso;
but I ask you—nearly eight years since I have seen
him! And then, under the circumstances! No, I must have
them all about me in this painful time—that is a natural feeling
for a mother.”</p>

<p>“Surely, surely,” said Consul Kröger; for she had begun
to weep.</p>

<p>“Thomas agrees with me now, too,” she went on; “for
where will Christian be better off than in his own father’s
business, in Tom’s business? He can stay here, work here.
I have been in constant fear that the climate over there might
be bad for him—”</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook, accompanied by Herr Marcus, came
into the room. Friederich Wilhelm Marcus, for years the
dead Consul’s confidential clerk, was a tall man in a brown-skirted
coat with a mourning band. He spoke softly, hesitatingly,
stammering a little and considering each word before
he uttered it. He had a habit of slowly and cautiously
stroking the red-brown moustache that grew over his mouth
with the extended middle and index fingers of his left hand;
or he would rub his hands together and let his round brown
eyes wander so aimlessly about that he gave the impression
of complete confusion and absent-mindedness, though he was
always most watchfully bent on the matter in hand.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook, now the youthful head of the great
house, displayed real dignity in manner and bearing. But he
was pale. His hands in particular, on one of which shone
the Consul’s signet ring with the green stone, were as white
as the cuffs beneath his black sleeves—a frozen whiteness
which showed that they were quite dry and cold. He had
extraordinarily sensitive hands, with beautifully cared-for
oval bluish fingernails. Sometimes, in a difficult situation,
they would take positions or make little nervous movements
that were indescribably expressive of shrinking sensibility
and painful reserve. This was an individual trait strange
heretofore to the rather broad, though finely articulated
Buddenbrook hand.</p>

<p>Tom’s first care was to open the folding doors into the
landscape-room in order to get the benefit of the warmth
from the stove burning there behind the wrought-iron lattice.
Then he shook hands with Consul Kröger and sat down at the
table with Herr Marcus opposite him. He looked at his sister
Tony, and his eyebrow went up in surprise. But she flung
her head back and tucked in her chin in a way that warned him
to suppress any comment on her presence.</p>

<p>“Well, and one may not say Herr Consul?” asked Justus
Kröger. “The Netherlands hope in vain that you should
represent them, Tom, my dear chap?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Uncle Justus, I thought it was better. You see, I
could have taken over the Consulate along with so many other
responsibilities, but in the first place I am a little too young—and
then I spoke to Uncle Gotthold, and he was very pleased
to accept it.”</p>

<p>“Very sensible, my lad; very politic. And very gentlemanly.”</p>

<p>“Herr Marcus,” said the Frau Consul, “my dear Herr Marcus!”
And with her usual sweeping gesture she reached out
her hand, which he took slowly, with a respectful side-glance:
“I have asked you to come up—you know what the affair is;
and I know that you are agreed with us. My beloved husband
expressed in his final arrangements the wish that after his
death you would put your loyal and well-tried powers at the
service of the firm, not as an outsider but as partner.”</p>

<p>“Certainly, Frau Consul,” said Herr Marcus, “I must protest
that I know how to value the honour your offer does me,
being aware, as I am, that the resources I can bring to the
firm are but small. In God’s name, I know nothing better to
do than thankfully to accept the offer you and your son make
me.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Marcus. And I thank you in my turn, most warmly,
for your willingness to share with me the great responsibilities
which would perhaps be too heavy for me alone.”
Thomas Buddenbrook spoke quickly and whole-heartedly,
reaching his hand across the table to his partner; for they
were already long since agreed on the subject, and this was
only the formal expression.</p>

<p>“Company is trumpery—you will spoil our chat, between
you,” said Consul Kröger. “And now, shall we run through
the provisions, my children? All I have to look out for is
the dowry of my ward. The rest is not my affair. Have you
a copy of the will here, Betsy? And have you made a rough
calculation, Tom?”</p>

<p>“I have it in my head,” said Thomas; and he began, leaning
back, looking into the landscape-room, and moving his
gold pencil back and forth on the table, to explain how matters
stood. The truth was that the Consul’s estate was more
considerable than any one had supposed. The dowry of his
oldest daughter, indeed, was gone, and the losses which the
firm had suffered in the Bremen failure in 1851 had been a
heavy blow. And the year ’48, as well as the present year ’55,
with their unrest and interval of war, had brought losses. But
the Buddenbrook share of the Kröger estate of four hundred
thousand current marks had been full three hundred thousand,
for Justus had already had much of his beforehand. Johann
Buddenbrook had continually complained, as a merchant will;
but the losses of the firm had been made good by the accrued
profits of some fifteen years, amounting to thirty thousand
thaler, and thus the property, aside from real estate, amounted
in round figures, to seven hundred thousand marks.</p>

<p>Thomas himself, with all his knowledge of the business, had
been left in ignorance by his father of this total. The Frau
Consul took the announcement with discreet calm; Tony put
on an adorable expression of pride and ignorance, and then
could not repress an anxious mental query: Is that a lot?
Are we very rich now? Herr Marcus slowly rubbed his
hands, apparently in absence of mind, and Consul Kröger
was obviously bored. But the sum filled Tom himself, as he
stated it, with such a rush of excited pride that the effort at
self-control made him seem dejected. “We must have already
passed the million,” he said. He controlled his voice, but his
hands trembled. “Grandfather could command nine hundred
thousand marks in his best time; and we’ve made great efforts
since then, and had successes, and made fine <i>coups</i> here and
there. And Mamma’s dowry, and Mamma’s inheritance!
There was the constant breaking-up—well, good heavens, that
lay in the nature of things! Please forgive me if I speak just
now in the sense of the firm and not of the family. These
dowries and payments to Uncle Gotthold and to Frankfort,
these hundreds of thousands which had to be drawn out of the
business—and then there were only two heirs beside the head
of the firm. Good; we have our work cut out for us, Marcus.”
The thirst for action, for power and success, the longing to
force fortune to her knees, sprang up quick and passionate
in his eyes. He felt all the world looking at him expectantly,
questioning if he would know how to command prestige for
the firm and the family and protect its name. On exchange
he had been meeting measuring side-looks out of jovial, mocking
old eyes, that seemed to be saying “So you’re taking it on,
my son!” “I <i>am</i>!” he thought.</p>

<p>Friederich Wilhelm Marcus rubbed his hands circumspectly,
and Justus Kröger said: “Quietly, quietly, my dear chap.
Times aren’t what they were when your grandfather was a
Prussian army contractor.”</p>

<p>There began now a detailed conversation upon the provisions
of the will, in which they all joined, and Consul Kröger
took a lighter tone, referring to Thomas as “his Highness the
reigning Prince” and saying, “The warehouses will go with the
crown, according to tradition.” In general, of course, it was
decided that as far as possible everything should be left together,
that Frau Elizabeth Buddenbrook should be considered
the sole heir, and that the entire property should remain in the
business. Herr Marcus announced that as partner he should
be able to strengthen the working capital by a hundred and
twenty thousand marks current. A sum of fifty thousand
marks was set aside as a private fortune for Thomas, and the
same for Christian, in case he wished to establish himself
separately. Justus Kröger paid close attention to the passage
that ran: “The fixing of the dowry of my beloved
daughter Clara I leave to the discretion of my dear wife.”
“Shall we say a hundred thousand?” he suggested, leaning
back, one leg crossed over the other, and turning up his short
grey moustache with both hands. He was affability itself.
But the sum was fixed at eighty thousand. “In case of a second
marriage of my dearly loved older daughter Antonie, in
view of the fact that eighty thousand marks have already
been applied to her first marriage, the sum of seventeen thousand
thaler current must not be exceeded.” Frau Antonie
waved her arm with a graceful but excited gesture which
tossed back her flowing sleeve; she looked at the ceiling and
said loudly: “Grünlich, indeed!” It sounded like a challenge,
like a little trumpet-call. “You know, Herr Marcus,”
she said, “about that man. We are sitting, one fine afternoon,
perfectly innocent, in the garden, in front of the door—you
know the portal, Herr Marcus. Well! Who appears? a person
with gold-coloured whiskers—the scoundrel!”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Thomas said. “We will talk about Herr Grünlich
afterward.”</p>

<p>“Very well; but you are a clever creature, and you will admit,
Tom, that in this life things don’t always happen fairly and
squarely. That’s been my experience, though a short time
ago I was too simple to realize it.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Tom said. They went into detail, noting the Consul’s
instructions about the great family Bible, about his diamond
buttons, and many, many other matters.</p>

<p>Justus Kröger and Herr Marcus stopped for supper.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> the beginning of February, 1856, after eight years’ absence,
Christian Buddenbrook returned to the home of his
fathers. He arrived in the post-coach from Hamburg, wearing
a yellow suit with a pattern of large checks, that had a
distinctly exotic look. He brought the bill of a swordfish
and a great sugar-cane, and received the embraces of his
mother with a half-embarrassed, half absent air.</p>

<p>He wore the same air when, on the next afternoon after his
arrival, the family went to the cemetery outside the Castle
Gate to lay a wreath on the grave. They stood together on the
snowy path in front of the large tablet on which were the
names of those resting there, surrounding the family arms
cut in the stone. Before them was the upright marble cross
that stood at the edge of the bare little churchyard grove.
They were all there except Clothilde, who was at Thankless,
nursing her ailing father.</p>

<p>Tony laid the wreath on the tablet, where her father’s name
stood on the stone in fresh gold letters: then, despite the
snow, she knelt down by the grave to pray. Her black veil
played about her, and her full skirt lay spread out in picturesque
folds. God alone knew how much grief and religious
emotion—and, on the other hand, how much of a pretty
woman’s self-conscious pleasure—there was in the bowed attitude.
Thomas was not in the mood to think about it. But
Christian looked sidewise at his sister with a mixture of
mockery and misgiving, as if to say: “Can you really carry
that off? Shan’t you feel silly when you get up? How uncomfortable!”
Tony caught this look as she rose, but she was
not in the least put out. She tossed her head back, arranged
her veil and skirt, and turned with dignified assurance to go;
whereupon Christian was obviously relieved.</p>

<p>The deceased Consul’s fanatical love of God and of the
Saviour had been an emotion foreign to his forebears, who
never cherished other than the normal, every-day sentiments
proper to good citizens. The two living Buddenbrooks had in
their turn their own idiosyncrasies. One of these appeared to
be a nervous distaste for the expression of feeling. Thomas
had certainly felt the death of his father with painful acuteness,
much as his grandfather had felt the loss of his. But
he could not sink on his knees by his grave. He had never,
like his sister Tony, flung himself across the table sobbing like
a child; and he shrank from hearing the heart-broken words
in which Madame Grünlich, from roast to dessert, loved to
celebrate the character and person of her dead father. Such
outbursts he met with composed silence or a reserved
nod. And yet, when nobody had mentioned or was thinking
of the dead, it would be just then that his eyes would fill
with slow tears, although his facial expression remained unchanged.</p>

<p>It was different with Christian. He unfortunately did not
succeed in preserving his composure at the naïve and childish
outpourings of his sister. He bent over his plate, turned his
head away, and looked as though he wanted to sink through
the floor; and several times he interrupted her with a low,
tormented “Good God, Tony!” his large nose screwed into
countless tiny wrinkles.</p>

<p>In fact, he showed disquiet and embarrassment whenever
the conversation turned to the dead. It seemed as though he
feared and avoided not only the indelicate expression of deep
and solemn feeling, but even the feeling itself.</p>

<p>No one had seen him shed a tear over the death of his
father; and his long absence alone hardly explained this fact.
A more remarkable thing, however, was that he took his sister
Tony aside again and again to hear in vivid detail the events
of that fatal afternoon; for Madame Grünlich had a gift of
lively narration.</p>

<p>“He looked yellow?” he asked for the fifth time. “What
was it the girl shrieked when she came running in to you?
He looked quite yellow, and died without saying another
word? What did the girl say? What sort of sound was it
he made?” Then he would be silent—silent a long time—while
his small deep-set eyes travelled round the room in
thought.</p>

<p>“Horrible,” he said suddenly, and a visible shudder ran
over him as he got up. He would walk up and down with
the same unquiet and brooding eyes. Madame Grünlich felt
astonished to see that her brother, who for some unknown
reason was so embarrassed when she bewailed her father
aloud, liked to reproduce with a sort of dreadful relish the
dying efforts to speak which he had inquired about in detail
of Lina the maid-servant.</p>

<p>Christian had certainly not grown better looking. He was
lean and pallid. The skin was stretched over his skull very
tightly; his large nose, with a distinct hump, stuck out fleshless
and sharp between his cheek-bones, and his hair was already
noticeably scantier. His neck was too thin and long
and his lean legs decidedly bowed. His London period seemed
to have made a lasting impression upon him. In Valparaiso,
too, he had mostly associated with Englishmen; and his whole
appearance had something English about it which somehow
seemed rather appropriate. It was partly the comfortable
cut and durable wool material of his clothing, the broad,
solid elegance of his boots, his crotchety expression, and the
way in which his red-blond moustache drooped over his
mouth. Even his hands had an English look: they were a
dull porous white from the hot climate, with round, clean,
short-trimmed nails.</p>

<p>“Tell me,” he said, abruptly, “do you know that feeling—it
is hard to describe—when you swallow something hard, the
wrong way, and it hurts all the way down your spine?” His
whole nose wrinkled as he spoke.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Tony; “that is quite common. You take a
drink of water—”</p>

<p>“Oh,” he said in a dissatisfied tone. “No, I don’t think
we mean the same thing.” And a restless look floated across
his face.</p>

<p>He was the first one in the house to shake off his mourning
and re-assume a natural attitude. He had not lost the art of
imitating the deceased Marcellus Stengel, and he often spoke
for hours in his voice. At the table he asked about the theatre—if
there were a good company and what they were giving.</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” said Tom, with a tone that was exaggeratedly
indifferent, in order not to seem irritated. “I haven’t
noticed lately.”</p>

<p>But Christian missed this altogether and went on to talk
about the theatre. “I am too happy for words in the theatre.
Even the <i>word</i> ‘theatre’ makes me feel happy. I don’t know
whether any of you have that feeling. I could sit for hours
and just look at the curtain. I feel as I used to when I was
a child and we went in to the Christmas party here. Even
the sound of the orchestra beforehand! I would go if only to
hear that and nothing more. I like the love scenes best.
Some of the heroines have such a fetching way of taking their
lovers’ heads between their hands. But the actors—in London
and Valparaiso I have known a lot of actors. At first I was
very proud to get to know them in ordinary life. In the
theatre I watched their every movement. It is fascinating.
One of them says his last speech and turns around quietly and
goes deliberately, without the least embarrassment, to the
door, although he knows that the eyes of the whole audience
are on his back. How can he do that? I used to be continually
thinking about going behind the scenes. But now I
am pretty much at home there, I must say. Imagine: once, in
an operetta—it was in London—the curtain went up one evening
when I was on the stage! I was talking with Miss Waterhouse,
a very pretty girl. Well, suddenly there was the whole
audience! Good Lord, I don’t know how I got off the stage.”</p>

<p>Madame Grünlich was the only one who laughed, to speak
of, in the circle round the table. But Christian went on, his
eyes wandering back and forth. He talked about English
<i>café-chantant</i> singers; about an actress who came on in powdered
wig, and knocked with a long cane on the ground and
sang a song called: “That’s Maria.” “Maria, you know—Maria
is the most scandalous of the lot. When somebody
does something perfectly shocking, why—‘that’s Maria’—the
bad lot, you know—utterly depraved!” He said this last
with a frightful expression and raised his right hand with the
fingers formed into a ring.</p>

<p>“<i>Assez</i>, Christian,” said the Frau Consul. “That does not
interest us in the least.”</p>

<p>But Christian’s gaze flickered absently over her head; he
would probably have stopped without her suggestion, for he
seemed to be sunk in a profound, disquieting dream of Maria
and her depravity, while his little round deep eyes wandered
back and forth.</p>

<p>Suddenly he said: “Strange—sometimes I can’t swallow.
Oh, it’s no joke. I find it very serious. It enters my head
that perhaps I can’t swallow, and then all of a sudden I can’t.
The food is already swallowed, but the muscles—right here—they
simply refuse. It isn’t a question of will-power. Or
rather, the thing is, I don’t dare really will it.”</p>

<p>Tony cried out, quite beside herself: “Christian! Good
Lord, what nonsense! You don’t dare to make up your mind
to swallow! What are you talking about? You are absurd!”</p>

<p>Thomas was silent. But the Frau Consul said: That is
nerves, Christian. Yes, it was high time you came home;
the climate over there would have killed you in the end.</p>

<p>After the meal Christian sat down at the little harmonium
that stood in the dining-room and imitated a piano virtuoso.
He pretended to toss back his hair, rubbed his hands, and
looked around the room; then, without a sound, without
touching the bellows—for he could not play in the least, and
was entirely unmusical, like all the Buddenbrooks—he bent
quite over and began to belabour the bass, played unbelievable
passages, threw himself back, looked in ecstasy at the ceiling,
and banged the key-board in a triumphant finale. Even
Clara burst out laughing. The illusion was convincing; full
of assurance and charlatanry and irresistible comicality of the
burlesque, eccentric English-American kind; so certain of its
own effect that the result was not in the least unpleasant.</p>

<p>“I have gone a great deal to concerts,” he said. “I like
to watch how the people behave with their instruments. It
is really beautiful to be an artist.”</p>

<p>Then he began to play again, but broke off suddenly and
became serious, as though a mask had fallen over his features.
He got up, ran his hand through his scanty hair, moved away,
and stood silent, obviously fallen into a bad mood, with unquiet
eyes and an expression as though he were listening to
some kind of uncanny noise.</p>

<p>“Sometimes I find Christian a little strange,” said Madame
Grünlich to her brother Thomas, one evening, when they were
alone. “He talks so, somehow. He goes so unnaturally into
detail, seems to me—or what shall I say? He looks at things
in such a strange way; don’t you think so?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Tom, “I understand what you mean very well,
Tony. Christian is very incautious—undignified—it is difficult
to express what I mean. Something is lacking in him—what
people call equilibrium, mental poise. On the one hand,
he does not know how to keep his countenance when other
people make naïve or tactless remarks—he does not understand
how to cover it up, and he just loses his self-possession
altogether. But the same thing happens when he begins to be
garrulous himself, in the unpleasant way he has, and tells his
most intimate thoughts. It gives one such an uncanny feeling—it
is just the way people speak in a fever, isn’t it? Self-control
and personal reserve are both lacking in the same
way. Oh, the thing is quite simple: Christian busies himself
too much with himself, with what goes on in his own insides.
Sometimes he has a regular mania for bringing out the deepest
and the pettiest of these experiences—things a reasonable
man does not trouble himself about or even want to know
about, for the simple reason that he would not like to tell
them to any one else. There is such a lack of modesty in so
much communicativeness. You see, Tony, anybody, except
Christian, may say that he loves the theatre. But he would say
it in a different tone, more <i>en passant</i>, more modestly, in short.
Christian says it in a tone that says: ‘Is not my passion for
the stage something very marvellous and interesting?’ He
struggles, he behaves as if he were really wrestling to express
something supremely delicate and difficult.”</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you,” he went on after a pause, throwing his cigarette
through the wrought-iron lattice into the stove: “I
have thought a great deal about this curious and useless self-preoccupation,
because I had once an inclination to it myself.
But I observed that it made me unsteady, hare-brained, and incapable—and
control, equilibrium, is, at least for me, the important
thing. There will always be men who are justified in
this interest in themselves, this detailed observation of their
own emotions; poets who can express with clarity and beauty
their privileged inner life, and thereby enrich the emotional
world of other people. But the likes of us are simple merchants,
my child; our self-observations are decidedly inconsiderable.
We can sometimes go so far as to say that the sound
of orchestra instruments gives us unspeakable pleasure, and
that we sometimes do not dare try to swallow—but it would
be much better, deuce take it, if we sat down and accomplished
something, as our fathers did before us.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom, you express my views exactly. When I think
of the airs those Hagenströms put on—oh, Heavens, what
truck! Mother doesn’t like the words I use, but I find they
are the only right ones. Do you suppose they think they are
the only good family in town? I have to laugh, you know;
I really do.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> head of the firm of Johann Buddenbrook had measured
his brother on his arrival with a long, scrutinizing gaze. He
had given him passing and unobtrusive observation during
several days; and then, though he did not allow any sign of
his opinion to appear upon his calm and discreet face, his curiosity
was satisfied, his mind made up. He talked with him
in the family circle in a casual tone on casual subjects and
enjoyed himself like the others when Christian gave a performance.
A week later he said to him: “Well, shall we
work together, young man? So far as I know, you consent
to Mamma’s wish, do you not? As you know, Marcus has
become my partner, in proportion to the quota he has paid
in. I should think that, as my brother, you could ostensibly
take the place he had—that of confidential clerk. What your
work would be—I do not know how much mercantile experience
you have really had. You have been loafing a bit, so
far—am I right? Well, in any case, the English correspondence
will suit you. But I must beg one thing of you, my
dear chap. In your position as brother of the head of the
house, you will actually have a superior position to the
others; but I do not need to tell you that you will impress
them far more by behaving like their equal and doing your
duty, than you will by making use of privileges and taking
liberties. Are you willing to keep office hours and observe
appearances?”</p>

<p>And then he made a proposal in respect of salary, which
Christian accepted without consideration, with an embarrassed
and inattentive face that betrayed very little love of gain and
a great zeal to settle the matter quickly. Next day Thomas led
him into the office; and Christian’s labours for the old firm
began.</p>

<p>The business had taken its uninterrupted and solid course
after the Consul’s death. But soon after Thomas Buddenbrook
seized the reins, a fresher and more enterprising
spirit began to be noticeable in the management. Risks were
taken now and then. The credit of the house, formerly a
conception, a theory, a luxury, was consciously strained and
utilized. The gentlemen on ’Change nodded at each other.
“Buddenbrook wants to make money with both hands,” they
said. They thought it was a good thing that Thomas had to
carry the upright Friederich Wilhelm Marcus along with him,
like a ball and chain on his foot. Herr Marcus’ influence was
the conservative force in the business. He stroked his moustache
with his two fingers, punctiliously arranged his writing
materials and glass of water on his desk, looked at everything
on both sides and top and bottom; and, five or six times in
the day, would go out through the courtyard into the wash-kitchen
and hold his head under the tap to refresh himself.</p>

<p>“They complement each other,” said the heads of the great
houses to each other; Consul Huneus said it to Consul Kistenmaker.
The small families echoed them; and the dockyard
and warehouse hands repeated the same opinion. The whole
town was interested in the way young Buddenbrook would
“take hold.” Herr Stuht in Bell-Founders’ Street would say
to his wife, who knew the best families: “They balance each
other, you see.”</p>

<p>But the personality of the business was plainly the younger
partner. He knew how to handle the personnel, the ship-captains,
the heads in the warehouse offices, the drivers and
the yard hands. He could speak their language with ease and
yet keep a distance between himself and them. But when
Herr Marcus spoke in dialect to some faithful servant it
sounded so outlandish that his partner would simply begin
to laugh, and the whole office would dissolve in merriment.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook’s desire to protect and increase the
prestige of the old firm made him love to be present in the
daily struggle for success. He well knew that his assured
and elegant bearing, his tact and winning manners were responsible
for a great deal of good trade.</p>

<p>“A business man cannot be a bureaucrat,” he said to
Stephan Kistenmaker, of Kistenmaker and Sons, his former
school-fellow. He had remained the oracle of this old
playmate, who listened to his every word in order to give it
out later as his own. “It takes personality—that is my view.
I don’t think any great success is to be had from the office
alone—at least, I shouldn’t care for it. I always want to
direct the course of things on the spot, with a look, a word,
a gesture—to govern it with the immediate influence of my will
and my talent—my luck, as you call it. But, unfortunately,
personal contact is going out of fashion. The times move on,
but it seems to me they leave the best behind. Relations are
easier and easier; the connections better and better; the risk
gets smaller—but the profits do too. Yes, the old people
were better off. My grandfather, for example—he drove
in a four-horse coach to Southern Germany, as commissary to
the Prussian army—an old man in pumps, with his head
powdered. And there he played his charms and his talents
and made an astonishing amount of money, Kistenmaker.
Oh, I’m afraid the merchant’s life will get duller and duller
as time goes on.”</p>

<p>It was feelings like these that made him relish most the
trade he came by through his own personal efforts. Sometimes,
entirely by accident, perhaps on a walk with the
family, he would go into a mill for a chat with the miller,
who would feel himself much honoured by the visit; and
quite <i>en passant</i>, in the best of moods, he would conclude
a good bargain. His partner was incapable of that sort
of thing.</p>

<p>As for Christian, he seemed at first to devote himself to
his task with real zest and enjoyment, and to feel exceptionally
well and contented. For several days he ate with
appetite, smoked his short pipe, and squared his shoulders
in the English jacket, giving expression to his sense of ease
and well-being. In the morning he went to the office at about
the same time as Thomas, and sat opposite his brother and
Herr Marcus in a revolving arm-chair like theirs. First he
read the paper, while he comfortably smoked his morning
cigarette. Then he would fetch out an old cognac from his
bottom desk drawer, stretch out his arms in order to feel
himself free to move, say “Well!” and go to work good-naturedly,
his tongue roving about among his teeth. His
English letters were extraordinarily able and effective, for he
wrote English as he spoke it, simply and fluently, without
effort.</p>

<p>He gave expression to his mood in his own way in the
family circle.</p>

<p>“Business is really a fine, gratifying calling,” he said.
“Respectable, satisfying, industrious, comfortable. I was
really born to it—fact! And as a member of the house!—well,
I’ve never felt so good before. You come fresh into
the office in the morning, and look through the paper, smoke,
think about this and that, take some cognac, and then go
to work. Comes midday; you eat with your family, take a
rest, then to work again. You write, on smooth, good business
paper, with a good pen, rule, paper-knife, stamp—everything
first-class and all in order. You keep at it, get
things done one after the other, and finish up. To-morrow
is another day. When you go home to supper, you feel
thoroughly satisfied—satisfied in every limb. Even your
hands—”</p>

<p>“Heavens, Christian,” cried Tony. “What rubbish! How
can your hands feel satisfied?”</p>

<p>“Why, yes, of course—can’t you understand that? I
mean—” he made a painstaking effort to express and explain.
“You can shut your fist, you see. You don’t make a
violent effort, of course, because you are tired from your
work. But it isn’t flabby; it doesn’t make you feel irritable.
You have a sense of satisfaction in it; you feel easy and
comfortable—you can sit quite still without feeling bored.”</p>

<p>Every one was silent. Then Thomas said in a casual tone,
so as not to show that he disagreed: “It seems to me that
one doesn’t work for the sake of—” He broke off and did
not continue. “At least, I have different reasons,” he added
after a minute. But Christian did not hear. His eyes roamed
about, sunk in thought; and he soon began to tell a story of
Valparaiso, a tale of assault and murder of which he had
personal knowledge. “Then the fellow ripped out his
knife—” For some reason Thomas never applauded these
tales. Christian was full of them, and Madame Grünlich
found them vastly entertaining. The Frau Consul, Clara,
and Clothilde sat aghast, and Mamsell Jungmann and Erica
listened with their mouths open. Thomas used to make cool
sarcastic comments and act as if he thought Christian was
exaggerating or hoaxing—which was certainly not the case.
He narrated with colour and vividness. Perhaps Thomas
found unpleasant the reflection that his younger brother had
been about and seen more of the world than he! Or were
his feelings of repulsion due to the glorification of disorder,
the exotic violence of these knife- and revolver-tales? Christian
certainly did not trouble himself over his brother’s failure
to appreciate his stories. He was always too much absorbed
in his narrative to notice its success or lack of success with
his audience, and when he had finished he would look pensively
or absently about the room.</p>

<p>But if in time the relations between the two brothers came
to be not of the best, Christian was not the one who thought
of showing or feeling any animosity against his brother. He
silently took for granted the pre-eminence of his elder, his
superior capacity, earnestness, and respectability. But precisely
this casual, indiscriminate acknowledgment irritated
Thomas, for it had the appearance of setting no value upon
superior capacity, earnestness, or respectability.</p>

<p>Christian appeared not to notice the growing dislike of the
head of the firm. Thomas’s feelings were indeed quite justifiable;
for unfortunately Christian’s zeal for business visibly
decreased, even after the first week, though more after the
second. His little preparations for work, which, in the beginning,
wore the air of a prolonged and refined anticipation:
the reading of the paper, the after-breakfast cigarette, the
cognac, began to take more and more time, and finally used
up the whole morning. It gradually came about that Christian
freed himself largely from the constraint of office hours.
He appeared later and later with his breakfast cigarette to
begin his preparations for work; he went at midday to eat
at the Club, and came back late or not at all.</p>

<p>This Club, to which mostly unmarried business men belonged,
occupied comfortable rooms in the first storey of a
restaurant, where one could eat and meet in unrestrained
and sometimes not altogether harmless conversation—for there
was a roulette table. Even some of the more light-minded
fathers of families, like Justus Kröger and, of course, Peter
Döhlmann, were members, and police senator Crema was
here “the first man at the hose.” That was the expression
of Dr. Gieseke—Andreas Gieseke, the son of the Fire Commissioner
and Christian’s old schoolmate. He had settled
as a lawyer in the town, and Christian renewed the friendship
with him, though he ranked as rather a wild fellow. Christian—or,
as he was called everywhere, Chris—had known
them all more or less in the old days, for nearly all of them
had been pupils of Marcellus Stengel. They received him
into the Club with open arms; for, while neither business men
nor scholars found him a genius, they recognized his amusing
social gifts. It was here that he gave his best performances
and told his best stories. He did the virtuoso at the
club piano and imitated English and transatlantic actors
and opera singers. But the best things he did were stories
of his affairs with women, related in the most harmless and
entertaining way imaginable—adventures that had befallen
him on shipboard, on trains, in St. Paul’s, in Whitechapel,
in the virgin forest. There was no doubt that Christian’s
weakness was for women. He narrated with a fluency and
power that entranced his listeners, in an exhaustless stream,
with his somewhat plaintive, drawling voice, burlesque and
innocent, like an English humourist. He told a story about
a dog that had been sent in a satchel from Valparaiso to
San Francisco and was mangy to boot. Goodness knew what
was the point of the anecdote—in his mouth it was indescribably
comic. And while everybody about him writhed with
laughter, unable to leave off, he himself sat there cross-legged,
a strange, uneasy seriousness in his face with its great hooked
nose, his thin, long neck, his sparse light-red hair and little
round deep-set eyes. It almost seemed as if the laugh were
at his expense, as if they were laughing at him. But that
never occurred to him.</p>

<p>At home his favourite tales were about his office in Valparaiso.
He told of the extreme heat there, and about a
young Londoner, named Johnny Thunderstorm, a ne’er-do-well,
an extraordinary chap, whom he had “never seen do a
stroke of work, God damn me,” and who yet was a remarkable
business man.</p>

<p>“Good God, the heat!” he said. “Well, the chief came
into the office—there we all lay, eight of us, like flies, and
smoked cigarettes to keep the mosquitoes away. Good God!
Well, the chief said: ‘You are not working, gentlemen?’
‘No, sir,’ says Johnny Thunderstorm, ‘as you see, sir!’ And
we all blew our cigarette-smoke in his face. Good God!”</p>

<p>“Why do you keep saying ‘good God’?” asked Thomas irritably.
But his irritation was at bottom because he felt
that Christian told this story with particular relish just because
it gave him a chance to sneer at honest work.</p>

<p>The Mother would discreetly change the subject. There
were many hateful things in the world, thought the Frau
Consul, born Kröger. Brothers could despise and dislike each
other, dreadful as it sounded; but one didn’t mention such
things. They had to be covered up and ignored.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> May it happened that Uncle Gotthold—Consul Gotthold
Buddenbrook, now sixty years old—was seized with a heart
attack one night and died in the arms of his wife, born
Stüwing.</p>

<p>The son of poor Madame Josephine had had the worst of
it in life, compared with the younger and stronger brother
and sister born of Madame Antoinette. But he had long
since resigned himself to his fortunes; and in his later years,
especially after his nephew turned over to him the Consulate
of the Netherlands, he ate his lozenges out of his tin box and
harboured the friendliest feelings. It was his ladies who kept
up the feud now: not so much his good-natured wife as the
three elderly damsels, who could not look at Frau Consul, or
Antonie, or Thomas, without a spark in their eyes.</p>

<p>On the traditional “children’s day,” at four o’clock, they
all gathered in the big house in Meng Street, to eat dinner
and spend the evening. Sometimes Consul Kröger or Sesemi
Weichbrodt came too, with her simple sister. On these occasions
the three Miss Buddenbrooks from Broad Street loved
to turn the conversation to Tony’s former marriage and to
dart sharp glances at each other while they egged Madame
Grünlich on to use strong language. Or they would make
general remarks on the subject of the undignified vanity of
dyeing one’s hair. Or they would enquire particularly after
Jacob Kröger, the Frau Consul’s nephew. They made jokes
at the expense of poor, innocent, Clothilde—jokes not so
harmless as those which the charity girl received in good part
every day from Tom and Tony. They made fun of Clara’s
austerity and bigotry. They were quick to find out that Tom
and Christian were not on the best of terms; also, that they
did not need to pay much attention to Christian anyhow, for
he was a sort of Tom-fool. As for Thomas himself, who had
no weak point for them to ferret out, and who always met
them with a good-humoured indulgence, that signified “I
understand what you mean, and I am very sorry”—him they
treated with respect tinctured with bitterness. Next came
the turn of little Erica. Rosy and plump as she was, they
found her alarmingly backward in her growth. And Pfiffi
in a series of little shakes drew attention several times to
the child’s shocking resemblance to the deceiver Grünlich.</p>

<p>But now they stood with their mother about their Father’s
death-bed, weeping; and a message was sent to Meng Street,
though the feeling was not entirely wanting that their rich
relations were somehow or other to blame for this misfortune
too.</p>

<p>In the middle of the night the great bell downstairs rang;
and as Christian had come home very late and was not feeling
up to much, Tom set out alone in the spring rain.</p>

<p>He came just in time to see the last convulsive motions
of the old gentleman. Then he stood a long time in the
death-chamber and looked at the short figure under the covers,
at the dead face with the mild features and white whiskers.
“You haven’t had a very good time, Uncle Gotthold,” he
thought. “You learned too late to make concessions and
show consideration. But that is what one has to do. If
I had been like you, I should have married a shop girl years
ago. But for the sake of appearances—! I wonder if you
really wanted anything different? You were proud, and
probably felt that your pride was something idealistic; but
your spirit had little power to rise. To cherish the vision
of an abstract good; to carry in your heart, like a hidden love,
only far sweeter, the dream of preserving an ancient name,
an old family, an old business, of carrying it on, and adding
to it more and more honour and lustre—ah, that takes imagination,
Uncle Gotthold, and imagination you didn’t have.
The sense of poetry escaped you, though you were brave
enough to love and marry against the will of your father.
And you had no ambition, Uncle Gotthold. The old name
is only a burgher name, it is true, and one cherishes it by
making the grain business flourish, and oneself beloved and
powerful in a little corner of the earth. Did you think: ‘I
will marry her whom I love, and pay no attention to practical
considerations, for they are petty and provincial?’ Oh,
we are travelled and educated enough to realize that the limits
set to our ambition are small and petty enough, looked at
from outside and above. But everything in this world is comparative,
Uncle Gotthold. Did you know one can be a
great man, even in a small place; a Cæsar even in a little
commercial town on the Baltic? But that takes imagination
and idealism—and you didn’t have it, whatever you may
have thought yourself.”</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook turned away. He went to the window
and looked out at the dim grey gothic façade of the Town
Hall opposite, shrouded in rain. He had his hands behind
his back and a smile on his intelligent face.</p>

<p>The office and title of the Royal Consulate of the Netherlands,
which Thomas Buddenbrook might have taken after
his father’s death, went back to him now, to the boundless
satisfaction of Tony Grünlich; and the curving shield with
the lions, the arms, and the crown was once more to be seen
on the gabled front of the house in Meng Street, under the
“Dominus providebit.”</p>

<p>Soon after this was accomplished, in June of the same
year, the young Consul set out to Amsterdam on a business
journey the duration of which he did not know.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Deaths</span> in the family usually induce a religious mood. It
was not surprising, after the decease of the Consul, to hear
from the mouth of his widow expressions which she had not
been accustomed to use.</p>

<p>But it was soon apparent that this was no passing phase.
Even in the last years of the Consul’s life, his wife had more
and more sympathized with his spiritual cravings; and it now
became plain that she was determined to honour the memory
of her dead by adopting as her own all his pious conceptions.</p>

<p>She strove to fill the great house with the spirit of the
deceased—that mild and Christlike spirit which yet had not
excluded a certain dignified and hearty good cheer. The
morning and evening prayers were continued and lengthened.
The family gathered in the dining-room, and the servants in
the hall, to hear the Frau Consul or Clara read a chapter
out of the great family Bible with the big letters. They
also sang a few verses out of the hymn-book, accompanied
by the Frau Consul on the little organ. Or, often, in place
of the chapter from the Bible, they had a reading from one
of those edifying or devotional books with the black binding
and gilt edges—those Little Treasuries, Jewel-Caskets, Holy
Hours, Morning Chimes, Pilgrims’ Staffs, and the like, whose
common trait was a sickly and languishing tenderness for the
little Jesus, and of which there were all too many in the
house.</p>

<p>Christian did not often appear at these devotions. Thomas
once chose a favourable moment to disparage the practice,
half-jestingly; but his objection met with a gentle rebuff. As
for Madame Grünlich, she did not, unfortunately, always conduct
herself correctly at the exercises. One morning when
there was a strange clergyman stopping with the Buddenbrooks,
they were invited to sing to a solemn and devout melody the
following words:—</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="verse">I am a reprobate,</div>
<div class="verse">A warped and hardened sinner;</div>
<div class="verse">I gobble evil down</div>
<div class="verse">Just like the joint for dinner.</div>
<div class="verse">Lord, fling thy cur a bone</div>
<div class="verse">Of righteousness to chew</div>
<div class="verse">And take my carcass home</div>
<div class="verse">To Heaven and to you.</div>
</div></div>

<p>Whereat Frau Grünlich threw down her book and left the
room, bursting with suppressed giggles.</p>

<p>But the Frau Consul made more demands upon herself than
upon her children. She instituted a Sunday School, and on
Sunday afternoon only little board-school pupils rang at the
door of the house in Meng Street. Stine Voss, who lived by
the city wall, and Mike Stuht from Bell-Founders’ Street,
and Fike Snut from the river-bank or Groping Alley, their
straw-coloured locks smoothed back with a wet comb, crossed
the entry into the garden-room, which for a long time now
had not been used as an office, and in which rows of benches
had been arranged and Frau Consul Buddenbrook, born
Kröger, in a gown of heavy black satin, with her white refined
face and still whiter lace cap, sat opposite to them
at a little table with a glass of sugar-water and catechized
them for an hour.</p>

<p>Also, she founded the “Jerusalem evenings,” which not
only Clara and Clothilde but also Tony were obliged to attend,
willy-nilly. Once a week they sat at the extension-table
in the dining-room by the light of lamps and candles. Some
twenty ladies, all of an age when it is profitable to begin
to look after a good place in heaven, drank tea or bishop,
ate delicate sandwiches and puddings, read hymns and sermons
aloud to each other, and did embroidery, which at the
end of the year was sold at a bazaar and the proceeds sent
to the mission in Jerusalem.</p>

<p>This pious society was formed in the main from ladies
of the Frau Consul’s own social rank: Frau Senator Langhals,
Frau Consul Möllendorpf, and old Frau Consul Kistenmaker
belonged; but other, more worldly and profane old
ladies, like Mme. Köppen, made fun of their friend Betsy.
The wives of the clergymen of the town were all members,
likewise the widowed Frau Consul Buddenbrook, born Stüwing,
and Sesemi Weichbrodt and her simple sister. There is, however,
no rank and no discrimination before Jesus; and so certain
humble oddities were also guests at the Jerusalem evenings—for
example, a little wrinkled creature, rich in the
grace of God and knitting-patterns, who lived in the Holy
Ghost Hospital and was named Himmelsburger. She was the
last of her name—“the last Himmelsburger,” she called herself
humbly, and ran her knitting-needle under her cap to
scratch her head.</p>

<p>But far more remarkable were two other extraordinary old
creatures, twins, who went about hand in hand through the
town doing good deeds, in shepherdess hats out of the eighteenth
century and faded clothes out of the long, long ago.
They were named Gerhardt, and asserted that they descended
in a direct line from Paul Gerhardt. People said they were
by no means poor; but they lived wretchedly and gave away
all they had. “My dears,” remarked the Frau Consul, who
was sometimes rather ashamed of them, “God sees the heart,
I know; but your clothes are really a little—one must take
some thought for oneself.” But she could not prevent them
kissing their elegant friend on the brow with the forebearing,
yearning, pitying superiority of the poor in heart
over the worldly great who seek salvation. They were not at
all stupid. In their homely shrivelled heads—for all the
world like ancient parrots—; they had bright soft brown
eyes and they looked out at the world with a wonderful expression
of gentleness and understanding. Their hearts were
full of amazing wisdom. They knew that in the last day all
our beloved gone before us to God will come with song and
salvation to fetch us home. They spoke the words “the Lord”
with the fluent authority of early Christians, as if they had
heard out of the Master’s own mouth the words, “Yet a little
while and ye shall see me.” They possessed the most remarkable
theories concerning inner light and intuition and
the transmission of thought. One of them, named Lea, was
deaf, and yet she nearly always knew what was being talked
about!</p>

<p>It was usually the deaf Gerhardt who read aloud at the
Jerusalem evenings, and the ladies found that she read beautifully
and very affectingly. She took out of her bag an old
book of a very disproportionate shape, much taller than
it was broad, with an inhumanly chubby presentment of her
ancestor in the front. She held it in both hands and read
in a tremendous voice, in order to catch a little herself of
what she read. It sounded as if the wind were imprisoned
in the chimney:</p>

<p class="center">“If Satan me would swallow.”</p>

<p>“Goodness!” thought Tony Grünlich, “how could Satan want
to swallow her?” But she said nothing and devoted herself
to the pudding, wondering if she herself would ever become
as ugly as the two Miss Gerhardts.</p>

<p>She was not happy. She felt bored and out of patience
with all the pastors and missionaries, whose visits
had increased ever since the death of the Consul. According
to Tony they had too much to say in the house and received
entirely too much money. But this last was Tom’s affair, and
he said nothing, while his sister now and then murmured
something about people who consumed widows’ homes and
made long prayers.</p>

<p>She hated these black gentlemen bitterly. As a mature
woman who knew life and was no longer a silly innocent,
she found herself unable to believe in their irreproachable
sanctity. “Mother,” she said, “oh dear, I know I must not
speak evil of my neighbours. But one thing I must say, and
I should be surprised if life had not taught you that too,
and that is that not all those who wear a long coat and say
‘Lord, Lord’ are always entirely without blemish.”</p>

<p>History does not say what Tom thought of his sister’s
opinion on this point. Christian had no opinion at all. He
confined himself to watching the gentlemen with his nose
wrinkled up, in order to imitate them afterward at the club
or in the family circle.</p>

<p>But it is true that Tony was the chief sufferer from the
pious visitants. One day it actually happened that a missionary
named Jonathan, who had been in Arabia and Syria—a
man with great, reproachful eyes and baggy cheeks was
stopping in the house, and challenged her to assert that the
curls she wore on her forehead were consistent with true
Christian humility. He had not reckoned with Tony Grünlich’s
skill at repartee. She was silent a moment, while her
mind worked rapidly; and then out it came. “May I ask
you, Herr Pastor, to concern yourself with your own curls?”
With that she rustled out, shoulders up, head back, and chin
well tucked in. Pastor Jonathan had very few curls on his
head—it would be nearer truth to say that he was quite
bald.</p>

<p>And once she had an even greater triumph. There was a
certain Pastor Trieschke from Berlin. His nickname was
Teary Trieschke, because every Sunday he began to weep at
an appropriate place in his sermon. Teary Trieschke had
a pale face, red eyes, and cheek-bones like a horse’s. He
had been stopping for eight or ten days with the Buddenbrooks,
conducting devotions and holding eating contests with
poor Clothilde, turn about. He happened to fall in love with
Tony—not with her immortal soul, oh no, but with her upper
lip, her thick hair, her pretty eyes and charming figure.
And the man of God, who had a wife and numerous children
in Berlin, was not ashamed to have Anton leave a letter in
Madame Grünlich’s bedroom in the upper storey, wherein
Bible texts and a kind of fawning sentimentality were surpassingly
mingled. She found it when she went to bed, read
it, and went with a firm step downstairs into the Frau Consul’s
bedroom, where by the candle-light she read aloud the
words of the soul-saver to her Mother, quite unembarrassed
and in a loud voice; so that Teary Trieschke became impossible
in Meng Street.</p>

<p>“They are all alike,” said Madame Grünlich; “ah, they
are all alike. Oh, heavens, what a goose I was once! But
life has destroyed my faith in men. Most of them are scoundrels—alas,
it is the truth. Grünlich—” The name was, as
always, like a summons to battle. She uttered it with her
shoulders lifted and her eyes rolled up.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Sievert Tiburtius</span> was a small, narrow man with a large
head and a thin, long, blond beard parted in the middle,
so that he sometimes put the ends back over his shoulders.
A quantity of little woolly ringlets covered his round head.
His ears were large and outstanding, very much curled up
at the edges and pointed at the tips like the ears of a fox.
His nose sat like a tiny flat button in his face, his cheek-bones
stood out, and his grey eyes, usually drawn close together and
blinking about rather stupidly, could at certain moments
widen quite extraordinarily, and get larger and larger, protruding
more and more until they almost sprang out of their
sockets.</p>

<p>This Pastor Tiburtius, who came from Riga, had preached
for some years in central Germany, and now touched at the
town on his way back home, where a living had been offered
to him. Armed with the recommendation of a brother of the
cloth who had eaten at least once in Meng Street of mock-turtle
soup and ham with onion sauce, he waited upon the
Frau Consul and was invited to be her guest for a few days.
He occupied the spacious guest-chamber off the corridor in
the first storey. But he stopped longer than he had expected.
Eight days passed, and still there was this or that to be
seen: the dance of death and the apostle-clock in St. Mary’s,
the Town Hall, the ancient Ships’ Company, the Cathedral
clock with the movable eyes. Ten days passed, and he spoke
repeatedly of his departure, but at the first word of demur
from anybody would postpone anew.</p>

<p>He was a better man than Herr Jonathan or Teary Trieschke.
He thought not at all about Frau Antonie’s curls and wrote
her no letters. Strange to say, he paid his attentions to
Clara, her younger and more serious sister. In her presence,
when she spoke, entered or left the room, his eyes would
grow surprisingly larger and larger and open out until they
nearly jumped out of his head. He would spend almost the
entire day in her company, in spiritual or worldly converse
or reading aloud to her in his high voice and with the
droll, jerky pronunciation of his Baltic home.</p>

<p>Even on the first day he said: “Permit me to say, Frau
Consul, what a treasure and blessing from God you have
in your daughter Clara. She is certainly a wonderful
child.”</p>

<p>“You are right,” replied the Frau Consul. But he repeated
his opinion so often that she began looking him over
with her pale-blue eyes, and led him on to speak of his
home, his connections, and his prospects. She learned that he
came of a mercantile family, that his mother was with God,
that he had no brothers and sisters, and that his old father
had retired and lived on his income in Riga—an income
which would sometime fall to him, Pastor Tiburtius. He
also had a sufficient living from his calling.</p>

<p>Clara Buddenbrook was now in her nineteenth year. She
had grown to be a young lady of an austere and peculiar
beauty, with a tall, slender figure, dark, smooth hair, and
stern yet dreamy eyes. Her nose was slightly hooked, her
mouth a little too firmly closed. In the household she was
most intimate with her poor and pious cousin Clothilde,
whose father had lately died, and whose idea it was to “establish
herself” soon—which meant to go into a pension somewhere
with the money and furniture which she had inherited.
Clara had nothing of Clothilde’s meek and hungry submissiveness.
On the contrary, with the servants and even with
her brothers and sister and mother, a commanding tone was
usual with her. Her low voice, which seemed only to drop
with decision and never to rise with a question, had an imperious
sound and could often take on a short, hard, impatient,
haughty quality—on days, for example, when Clara had a
headache.</p>

<p>Before the father’s death had shrouded the family in mourning,
she had taken part with irreproachable dignity in the
society of her parents’ house and other houses of like rank.
But when the Frau Consul looked at her, she could not deny
that, despite the stately dowry and Clara’s domestic prowess,
it would not be easy to marry her off. None of the godless,
jovial, claret-drinking merchants of their circle would answer
in the least; a clergyman would be the only suitable partner
for this earnest and God-fearing maiden. After the Frau
Consul had conceived this joyful idea, she responded with
friendliness to the delicate advances of Pastor Tiburtius.</p>

<p>And truly the affair developed with precision. On a warm,
cloudless July afternoon the family took a walk: the Frau
Consul, Antonie, Christian, Clara, Clothilde, Erica Grünlich,
and Mamsell Jungmann, with Pastor Tiburtius in their midst,
went out far beyond the Castle Gate to eat strawberries and
clotted milk or porridge at a wooden table laid out-of-doors,
going after the meal into the large nut-garden which ran
down to the river, in the shade of all sorts of fruit-trees,
between currant and gooseberry bushes, asparagus and potato
patches.</p>

<p>Sievert Tiburtius and Clara Buddenbrook stopped a little
behind the others. He, much the smaller of the two, with his
beard parted back over his shoulders, had taken off his broad-brimmed
black hat from his big head; and he wiped his brow
now and then with his handkerchief. His eyes were larger
than usual and he carried on with her a long and gentle
conversation, in the course of which they both stood still, and
Clara, with a serious, calm voice said her “Yes.”</p>

<p>After they returned, the Frau Consul, a little tired and
overheated, was sitting alone in the landscape-room, when
Pastor Tiburtius came and sat beside her. Outside there
reigned the pensive calm of the Sabbath afternoon; and they
sat inside and held, in the brightness of the summer evening,
a long, low conversation, at the end of which the Frau Consul
said: “Enough, my dear Herr Pastor. Your offer coincides
with my motherly plans for my daughter; and you on
your side have not chosen badly—that I can assure you. Who
would have thought that your coming and your stay here in
our house would be so wonderfully blest! I will not speak
my final word to-day, for I must write first to my son, the
Consul, who is at present, as you know, away. You will
travel to-morrow, if you live and have your health, to Riga,
to take up your work; and we expect to go for some weeks
to the seashore. You will receive word from me soon, and
God grant that we shall have a happy meeting.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<div class="blockquot">
<p class="right"><span class="smcap">Amsterdam</span>, July 30th, 1856<br/>
<span class="indentright2"><span class="allsmcap">HOTEL HET HASSJE</span></span></p>

<p><span class="smcap">My dear Mother</span>,</p>

<p>I have just received your important letter, and hasten to
thank you for the consideration you show me in asking for
my consent in the affair under discussion. I send you, of
course, not only my hearty agreement, but add my warmest
good-wishes, being thoroughly convinced that you and Clara
have made a good choice. The fine name Tiburtius is known
to me, and I feel sure that Papa had business relations with
the father. Clara comes into pleasant connections, in any
case, and the position as pastor’s wife will be very suited to
her temperament.</p>

<p>And Tiburtius has gone back to Riga, and will visit his
bride again in August? Well, it will be a gay time then with
us in Meng Street—gayer than you realize, for you do not
know the reason why I was so joyfully surprised by Mademoiselle
Clara’s betrothal, nor what a charming company it is
likely to be. Yes, my dear good Mother: I am complying
with the request to send my solemn consent to Clara’s betrothal
from the Amstel to the Baltic. But I do so on condition
that you send me a similar consent by return of post!
I would give three solid gulden to see your face, and even
more that of our honest Tony, when you read these lines.
But I will come to the point.</p>

<p>My clean little hotel is in the centre of the town with a
pretty view of the canal. It is not far from the Bourse; and
the business on which I came here—a question of a new and
valuable connection, which you know I prefer to look after
in person—has gone successfully from the first day. I have
still considerable acquaintance here from the days of my apprenticeship;
so, although many families are at the shore now,
I have been invited out a good deal. I have been at small
evening companies at the Van Henkdoms and the Moelens, and
on the third day after my arrival I had to put on my dress
clothes to go to a dinner at the house of my former chief,
van der Kellen, which he had arranged out of season in my
honour. Whom did I take in to dinner? Should you like to
guess? Fräulein Arnoldsen, Tony’s old school-fellow. Her
father, the great merchant and almost greater violin artist,
and his married daughter and her husband were also of the
party.</p>

<p>I well remember that Gerda—if I may call her so—from
the beginning, even when she was a young girl at school at
Fräulein Weichbrodt’s on the Millbrink, made a strong impression
on me, never quite obliterated. But now I saw her
again, taller, more developed, lovelier, more animated.
Please spare me a description, which might so easily sound
overdrawn—and you will soon see each other face to face.</p>

<p>You can imagine we had much to talk about at the table,
but we had left the old memories behind by the end of the
soup, and went on to more serious and fascinating matters.
In music I could not hold my own with her, for we poor
Buddenbrooks know all too little of that, but in the art of the
Netherlands I was more at home, and in literature we were
fully agreed.</p>

<p>Truly the time flew. After dinner I had myself presented
to old Herr Arnoldsen, who received me with especial cordiality.
Later, in the salon, he played several concert pieces,
and Gerda also performed. She looked wonderful as she
played, and although I have no notion of violin playing, I
know that she knew how to sing upon her instrument (a real
Stradivarius) so that the tears nearly came into my eyes.
Next day I went to call on the Arnoldsens. I was received at
first by an elderly companion, with whom I spoke French,
but then Gerda came, and we talked as on the day before for
perhaps an hour, only that this time we drew nearer together
and made still more effort to understand and know each
other. The talk was of you, Mamma, of Tony, of our good old
town, and of my work.</p>

<p>And on that day I had already taken the firm resolve: this
one or no one, now or never! I met her again by chance at
a garden party at my friend van Svindren’s, and I was invited
to a musical evening at the Arnoldsens’, in the course of
which I sounded the young lady by a half-declaration, which
was received encouragingly. Five days ago I went to Herr
Arnoldsen to ask for permission to win his daughter’s hand.
He received me in his private office. “My dear Consul,” he
said, “you are very welcome, hard as it will be for an old
widower to part from his daughter. But what does she say?
She has already held firmly to her resolve never to marry.
Have you a chance?” He was extremely surprised when I
told him that Fräulein Gerda had actually given me ground
for hope.</p>

<p>He left her some time for reflection, and I imagine that out
of pure selfishness he dissuaded her. But it was useless.
She had chosen me—since yesterday evening the betrothal is
an accomplished fact.</p>

<p>No, my dear Mother, I am not asking a written answer to
this letter, for I am leaving to-morrow. But I am bringing
with me the Arnoldsens’ promise that father, daughter, and
married sister will visit us in August, and then you will be
obliged to confess that she is the very wife for me. I hope
you see no objection in the fact that Gerda is only three years
younger than I? I am sure you never thought I would marry
a chit out of the Möllendorpf-Langhals, Kistenmaker-Hagenström
circle.</p>

<p>And now for the dowry. I am almost frightened to think
how Stephan Kistenmaker and Hermann Hagenström and
Peter Döhlmann and Uncle Justus and the whole town will
blink at me when they hear of the dowry. For my future
father-in-law is a millionaire. Heavens, what is there to say?
We are such complex, contradictory creatures! I deeply love
and respect Gerda Arnoldsen; and I simply will not delve
deep down enough in myself to find out how much the thought
of the dowry, which was whispered into my ear that first evening,
contributed to my feeling. I love her: but it crowns
my happiness and pride to think that when she becomes mine,
our firm will at the same time gain a very considerable increase
of capital.</p>

<p>I must close this letter, dear Mother; considering that in a
few days, we shall be talking over my good fortune together,
it is already too long. I wish you a pleasant and beneficial
stay at the baths, and beg you to greet all the family most
heartily for me. Your loving and obedient son,</p>

<p class="right">T.</p>
</div>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">That</span> year there was indeed a merry midsummer holiday in
the Buddenbrook home. At the end of July Thomas returned
to Meng Street and visited his family at the shore
several times, like the other business men in the town. Christian
had allotted full holidays unto himself, as he complained
of an indefinite ache in his left leg. Dr. Grabow did not
seem to treat it successfully, and Christian thought of it so
much the more.</p>

<p>“It is not a pain—one can’t call it a pain,” he expatiated,
rubbing his hand up and down his leg, wrinkling his big nose,
and letting his eyes roam about. “It is a sort of ache, a
continuous, slight, uneasy ache in the whole leg and on the
left side, the side where the heart is. Strange. I find it
strange—what do you think about it, Tom?”</p>

<p>“Well, well,” said Tom, “you can have a rest and the
sea-baths.”</p>

<p>So Christian went down to the shore to tell stories to
his fellow-guests, and the beach resounded with their laughter.
Or he played roulette with Peter Döhlmann, Uncle Justus,
Dr. Gieseke, and other Hamburg high-fliers.</p>

<p>Consul Buddenbrook went with Tony, as always when they
were in Travemünde, to see the old Schwarzkopfs on the
front. “Good day, Ma’am Grünlich,” said the pilot-captain,
and spoke low German out of pure good feeling.</p>

<p>“Well, well, what a long time ago that was! And
Morten, he’s a doctor in Breslau and has all the practice in
the town, the rascal.” Frau Schwarzkopf ran off and made
coffee, and they supped in the green verandah as they used
to—only all of them were a good ten years older, and Morten
and little Meta were not there, she having married the magistrate
of Haffkrug. And the captain, already white-haired and
rather deaf, had retired from his office—and Madame Grünlich
was not a goose any more! Which did not prevent her
from eating a great many slices of bread and honey, for, as
she said: “Honey is a pure nature product—one knows
what one is getting.”</p>

<p>At the beginning of August the Buddenbrooks, like most of
the other families, returned to town; and then came the great
moment when, almost at the same time, Pastor Tiburtius from
Prussia and the Arnoldsens from Holland arrived for a long
visit in Meng Street.</p>

<p>It was a very pretty scene when the Consul led his bride
for the first time into the landscape-room and took her to his
mother, who received her with outstretched arms. Gerda
had grown tall and splendid. She walked with a free and
gracious bearing; with her heavy dark-red hair, her close-set
brown eyes with the blue shadows round them, her large,
gleaming teeth which showed when she smiled, her straight
strong nose and nobly formed mouth, this maiden of seven-and-twenty
years had a strange, aristocratic, haunting beauty. Her
face was white and a little haughty, but she bowed her head
as the Frau Consul with gentle feeling took it between her
hands and kissed the pure, snowy forehead. “Yes, you are
welcome to our house and to our family, you dear, beautiful,
blessed creature,” she said. “You will make him happy. Do
I not see already how happy you make him?” And she
drew Thomas forward with her other arm, to kiss him also.</p>

<p>Never, except perhaps in Grandfather’s time, was there
more gay society in the great house, which accommodated
its guests with ease. Pastor Tiburtius had modestly chosen
a bed-chamber in the back building next the billiard-room.
But the rest divided the unoccupied space on the ground floor
next the hall and in the first storey: Gerda; Herr Arnoldsen,
a quick, clever man at the end of the fifties, with a
pointed grey beard and a pleasant impetuosity in every motion;
his oldest daughter, an ailing-looking woman; and his
son-in-law, an elegant man of the world, who was turned over
to Christian for entertainment in the town and at the club.</p>

<p>Antonie was overjoyed that Sievert Tiburtius was the only
parson in the house. The betrothal of her adored brother
rejoiced her heart. Aside from Gerda’s being her friend, the
parti was a brilliant one, gilding the family name and the
firm with such new glory! And the three-hundred-thousand
mark dowry and the thought of what the town and particularly
the Hagenströms would say to it, put her in a state of prolonged
and delightful enchantment. Three times daily, at
least, she passionately embraced her future sister-in-law.</p>

<p>“Oh, Gerda,” she cried, “I love you—you know I always
did love you. I know you can’t stand me—you used to hate
me; but—”</p>

<p>“Why, Tony!” said Fräulein Arnoldsen. “How could I
have hated you? Did you ever do anything to me?” For
some reason, however—probably out of mere wantonness and
love of talking—Tony asserted stoutly that Gerda had always
hated her, while she on her side had always returned the hate
with love. She took Thomas aside and told him: “You have
done very well, Tom. Oh, heavens, how well you have done!
If Father could only see this—it is just dreadful that he
cannot! Yes, this wipes out a lot of things—not least the
affair with that person whose name I do not even like to
speak.”</p>

<p>Which put it into her head to take Gerda into an empty
room and tell her with awful detail the story of her married
life with Bendix Grünlich. Then they talked for hours
about boarding-school days and the bed-time gossip; of Armgard
von Schilling in Mecklenburg and Eva Ewers in Munich.
Tony paid little or no attention to Sievert Tiburtius and his
betrothed—which troubled them not at all. The lovers sat
quietly together hand in hand, and spoke gently and earnestly
of the beautiful future before them.</p>

<p>As the year of mourning was not quite over, the two betrothals
were celebrated only in the family. But Gerda
quickly became a celebrity in the town. Her person formed
the chief subject of conversation on the Bourse, at the club,
at the theatre, and in society. “Tip-top,” said the gallants,
and clucked their tongues, for that was the latest Hamburg
slang for a superior article, whether a brand of claret, a
cigar, or a “deal.” But among the solid, respectable citizens
there was much head-shaking. “Something queer about her,”
they said. “Her hair, her face, the way she dresses—a little
too unusual.” Sorenson expressed it: “She has a certain
something about her!” He made a face as if he were on
the Bourse and somebody had made him a doubtful proposition.
But it was all just like Consul Buddenbrook: a little
pretentious, not like his forebears. Everybody knew—not
least Benthien the draper—that he ordered his clothes from
Hamburg: not only the fine new-fashioned materials for his
suits—and he had a great many of them, cloaks, coats, waistcoats,
and trousers—but his hats and cravats and linen as well.
He changed his shirt every day, sometimes twice a day, and
perfumed his handkerchief and his moustache, which he wore
cut like Napoleon III. All this was not for the sake of the
firm, of course—the house of Johann Buddenbrook did not
need that sort of thing—but to gratify his own personal taste
for the superfine and aristocratic—or whatever you might call
it. And then the quotations from Heine and other poets
which he dropped sometimes in the most practical connections,
in business or civic matters! And now, his bride—well,
Consul Buddenbrook himself had “a certain something” about
him! All this, of course, with the greatest respect; for the
family was highly esteemed, the firm very, very “good,” and
the head of it an able and charming man who loved his city
and would still serve her well. It was really a devilishly
fine match for him; there was talk of a hundred thousand
thaler down; but of course.... Among the ladies there were
some who found Gerda “silly”; which, it will be recalled,
was a very severe judgment.</p>

<p>But the man who gazed with furious ardour at Thomas
Buddenbrook’s bride, the first time he saw her on the street,
was Gosch the broker. “Ah!” he said in the club or the
Ships’ Company, lifting his glass and screwing up his face
absurdly, “what a woman! Hera and Aphrodite, Brunhilda
and Melusine all in one! Oh, how wonderful life is!” he
would add. And not one of the citizens who sat about with
their beer on the hard wooden benches of the old guild-house,
under the models of sailing vessels and big stuffed fish hanging
down from the ceiling, had the least idea what the advent
of Gerda Arnoldsen meant in the yearning life of Gosch the
broker.</p>

<p>The little company in Meng Street, not committed, as we
have seen, to large entertainments, had the more leisure for
intimacy with each other. Sievert Tiburtius, with Clara’s
hand in his, talked about his parents, his childhood, and his
future plans. The Arnoldsens told of their people, who came
from Dresden, only one branch of them having been transplanted
to Holland.</p>

<p>Madame Grünlich asked her brother for the key of the
secretary in the landscape-room, and brought out the portfolio
with the family papers, in which Thomas had already entered
the new events. She proudly related the Buddenbrook
history, from the Rostock tailor on; and when she read out
the old festival verses:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="verse">Industry and beauty chaste</div>
<div class="verse">See we linked in marriage band:</div>
<div class="verse">Venus Anadyomene,</div>
<div class="verse">And cunning Vulcan’s busy hand</div>
</div></div>

<p>she looked at Tom and Gerda and let her tongue play over
her lips. Regard for historical veracity also caused her to
narrate events connected with a certain person whose name she
did not like to mention!</p>

<p>On Thursday at four o’clock the usual guests came. Uncle
Justus brought his feeble wife, with whom he lived an unhappy
existence. The wretched mother continued to scrape
together money out of the housekeeping to send to the degenerate
and disinherited Jacob in America, while she and her
husband subsisted on almost nothing but porridge. The Buddenbrook
ladies from Broad Street also came; and their love
of truth compelled them to say, as usual, that Erica Grünlich
was not growing well and that she looked more than ever
like her wretched father. Also that the Consul’s bride wore
a rather conspicuous coiffure. And Sesemi Weichbrodt came
too, and standing on her tip-toes, kissed Gerda with her little
explosive kiss on the forehead and said with emotion: “Be
happy, my dear child.”</p>

<p>At table Herr Arnoldsen gave one of his witty and fanciful
toasts in honour of the two bridal pairs. While the rest drank
their coffee he played the violin, like a gipsy, passionately,
with abandonment—and with what dexterity!... Gerda
fetched her Stradivarius and accompanied him in his passages
with her sweet cantilena. They performed magnificent duets
at the little organ in the landscape-room, where once the
Consul’s grandfather had played his simple melodies on the
flute.</p>

<p>“Sublime!” said Tony, lolling back in her easy-chair. “Oh,
heavens, how sublime that is!” And she rolled up her eyes
to the ceiling to express her emotions. “You know how it
is in life,” she went on, weightily. “Not everybody is given
such a gift. Heaven has unfortunately denied it to me,
though I used to pray for it at night. I am a goose, a silly
creature. You know, Gerda—I am the elder and have learned
to know life—let me tell you, you ought to thank your Creator
every day on your knees, for being such a gifted creature!”</p>

<p>“Oh, please,” said Gerda, with a laugh, showing her beautiful
large white teeth.</p>

<p>Later they all ate wine jelly and discussed their plans for
the near future. At the end of that month or the beginning
of September, it was decided, Sievert Tiburtius and the Arnoldsens
would go home. Then, directly after Christmas,
Clara’s wedding would be celebrated with due solemnity in
the great hall. The Frau Consul, health permitting, would
attend Tom’s wedding in Amsterdam. But it must be put off
until the beginning of the next year, that there might be a
little pause for rest between. It was no use for Thomas to
protest. “Please,” said the Frau Consul, and laid her hand
on his sleeve. “Sievert should have the precedence, I think.”</p>

<p>The Pastor and his bride had decided against a wedding
journey. Gerda and Thomas, however, were to take a trip
to northern Italy, as far as Florence, and be gone about two
months. In the meantime Tony, with the help of the upholsterer
Jacobs in Fish Street, was to make ready the charming
little house in Broad Street, the property of a bachelor
who had moved to Hamburg. The Consul was already arranging
for its purchase. Oh, Tony would furnish it to the
Queen’s taste. “It will be perfect,” she said. They were
all sure it would.</p>

<p>Christian looked on while the two bridal pairs held hands,
and listened to the talk about weddings and trousseaux and
bridal journeys. His nose looked bigger and his legs more
crooked than ever. He felt an indefinite sort of pain in the
left one, and stared solemnly at them all out of his little
round deep-set eyes. Finally, in the accents of Marcellus
Stengel, he said to his cousin Clothilde, who sat elderly,
dried-up, silent, and hungry, at table among the happy
throng: “Well, Tilda, let’s <i>us</i> get married too—I mean, of
course each one for himself.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Some</span> six months later Consul Buddenbrook returned with
his bride from Italy. The March snows lay in Broad Street
as the carriage drove up at five o’clock before the front door
of their simple painted façade. A few children and grown
folk had stopped to watch the home-coming pair descend.
Frau Antonie Grünlich stood proudly in the doorway, behind
her the two servant-maids, with white caps, bare arms, and
thick striped skirts—she had engaged them beforehand for
her sister-in-law. Flushed with pleasure and industry, she ran
impetuously down the steps; Gerda and Thomas climbed out
of the trunk-laden carriage wrapped in their furs; and she
drew them into the house in her embrace.</p>

<p>“Here you are! You lucky people, to have travelled so
far in the world. ‘Knowest thou the house? High-pillared
are its walls!’ Gerda, you are more beautiful than ever;
here, I must kiss you—no, so, on the mouth. How are you,
Tom, old fellow?—yes, I must kiss you too. Marcus says
everything has gone well here. Mother is waiting for you
at home, but you can first just make yourselves comfortable.
Will you have some tea? Or a bath? Everything is ready—you
won’t complain. Jacobs did his best—and I have done
all I could, too.”</p>

<p>They went together into the vestibule, and the servants
brought in the luggage with the help of the coachman. Tony
said: “The rooms here in the parterre you will probably
not need for the present. <i>For the present</i>,” she repeated,
running her tongue over her upper lip. “Look, this is
pretty,” and she opened a door directly next the vestibule.
“Simple oak furniture, ivy at the windows. Over there, the
other side of the corridor, is another room, a larger one.
Here on the right are the kitchen and larder. But let’s go
up. I will show you everything.” They went up the stairs,
which were covered with a dark-red runner. Above, behind
a glass partition, was a narrow corridor which led to the
dining-room. This had dark-red damask wall-paper, a heavy
round table upon which the samovar was steaming, a massive
sideboard, and chairs of carved nut-wood, with rush seats.
Then there was a comfortable sitting-room upholstered in
grey, separated by portières from a small salon with a
bay-window and furniture in green striped rep. A fourth
of this whole storey was occupied by a large hall with three
windows.</p>

<p>Then they went into the sleeping-room, on the right of the
corridor. It had flowered hangings and solid mahogany beds.
Tony passed on to a small door with open-work carving in
the opposite wall, and displayed a winding stair leading from
the bedroom to the lower floors, the bathroom, and the servants’
quarters.</p>

<p>“It is pretty here. I shall stop here,” said Gerda, and sank
with a deep breath into the reclining-chair beside one of the
beds.</p>

<p>The Consul bent over and kissed her forehead. “Tired? I
feel like that too. I should like to tidy up a bit.”</p>

<p>“I’ll look after the tea,” said Tony Grünlich, “and wait
for you in the dining-room.”</p>

<p>The tea stood steaming in the Meissenware cups when
Thomas entered. “Here I am,” he said. “Gerda would like
to rest a little. She has a headache. Afterward we will go
to Meng Street. Well, how is everything, my dear Tony—all
right? Mother, Erica, Christian? But now,” he went
on with his most charming manner, “our warmest thanks—Gerda’s
too—for all your trouble, you good soul. How
pretty you have made everything! Nothing is missing.—I
only need a few palms for my wife’s bay-window; and I
must look about for some suitable oil paintings. But tell
me, now, how are you? What have you been doing all this
time?”</p>

<p>He had drawn up a chair for his sister beside himself, and
slowly drank his tea and ate a biscuit as they talked.</p>

<p>“Oh, Tom,” she answered. “What should I be doing? My
life is over.”</p>

<p>“Nonsense, Tony—you and your life! But it <i>is</i> pretty tiresome,
is it?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom, it is very tiresome. Sometimes I just have to
shriek, out of sheer boredom. It has been nice to be busy
with this house, and you don’t know how happy I am at
your return. But I am not happy here—God forgive me, if
that is a sin. I am in the thirties now, but I’m still not
quite old enough to make intimate friends with the last of the
Himmelsburgers, or the Miss Gerhardts, or any of mother’s
black friends that come and consume widows’ homes. I
don’t believe in them, Tom; they are wolves in sheep’s clothing—a
generation of vipers. We are all weak creatures with
sinful hearts, and when they begin to look down on me for
a poor worldling I laugh in their faces. I’ve always thought
that all men are the same, and that we don’t need any intercessors
between us and God. You know my political beliefs.
I think the citizens—”</p>

<p>“Then you feel lonely?” Tom asked, to bring her back to
her starting-point. “But you have Erica.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom, and I love the child with my whole heart—although
a certain person did use to declare that I am not fond
of children. But you see—I am perfectly frank; I am an
honest woman and speak as I think, without making words—”</p>

<p>“Which is splendid of you, Tony.”</p>

<p>“Well, in short—it is sad, but the child reminds me too
much of Grünlich. The Buddenbrooks in Broad Street think
she is very like him too. And then, when I see her before
me I always think: ‘You are an old woman with a big daughter,
and your life is over. Once for a few years you were
alive; but now you can grow to be seventy or eighty years
old, sitting here and listening to Lea Gerhardt read aloud.’
That is such an awful thought, Tom, that a lump comes in
my throat. Because I still feel so young, and still long to
see life again. And besides, I don’t feel comfortable—not
only in the house; but in the town. You know I haven’t been
struck blind. I have my eyes in my head and see how things
are; I am not a stupid goose any more, I am a divorced
woman—and I am made to feel it, that’s certain. Believe
me, Tom, it lies like a weight on my heart, to know that I
have besmirched our name, even if it was not any fault of
mine. You can do whatever you will, you can earn money
and be the first man in the town—but people will still say:
‘Yes, but his sister is a divorced woman.’ Julchen Möllendorpf,
the Hagenström girl—she doesn’t speak to me! Oh,
well, she is a goose. It is the same with all families.
And yet I can’t get rid of the hope that I could make it all
good again. I am still young—don’t you think I am still
rather pretty? Mamma cannot give me very much again, but
even what she can give is an acceptable sum of money. Suppose
I were to marry again? To confess the truth, Tom, it
is my most fervent wish. Then everything would be put
right and the stain wiped out. Oh, if I could only make a
match worthy of our name, and set myself up again—do you
think it is entirely out of the question?”</p>

<p>“Not in the least, Tony. Heaven forbid! I have always
thought of it. But it seems to me that in the first place you
must get out a little, have a little change, and brighten up
a bit.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s it,” she cried eagerly. “Now I must tell you
a little story.”</p>

<p>Thomas was well pleased. He leaned back in his chair
and smoked his second cigarette. The twilight was coming on.</p>

<p>“Well, then, while you were away, I almost took a situation—a
position as companion in Liverpool! Would you have
thought it was shocking? Oh, I know it would have been
undignified! But I was so wildly anxious to get away. The
plan came to nothing. I sent my photograph to the lady,
and she wrote that she must decline my services, because I
was too pretty—there was a grown son in the house. ‘You
are too pretty,’ she wrote! I don’t know when I have been so
pleased.”</p>

<p>They both laughed heartily.</p>

<p>“But now I have something else in mind,” went on Tony.
“I have had an invitation, from Eva Ewers, to go to Munich.
Her name is Eva Niederpaur now; her husband is superintendent
of a brewery. Well, she has asked me to visit her,
and I think I will take advantage of the invitation. Of course,
Erica could not go with me. I would put her in Sesemi
Weichbrodt’s pension. She would be well taken care of.
Have you any objection?”</p>

<p>“Not at all. It is necessary, in any case, that you should
make some new connections.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s it,” she said gratefully. “But now, Tom. I
have been talking the whole time about myself; I am a selfish
thing. Now, tell me your affairs. Oh, Heavens, how happy
you must be.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tony,” he said with emphasis. There was a pause.
He blew out the smoke across the table and continued: “In
the first place, I am very glad to be married and set up an
establishment. You know I should not make a good bachelor.
It has a side to it that suggests loneliness and also laziness—and
I am ambitious, as you know. I don’t feel that my career
is finished, either in business or—to speak half-jestingly—in
politics. And a man gains the confidence of the world better
if he is a family man and a father. Though I came within
an ace of not doing it, after all! I am a bit fastidious. For
a long time I thought it would not be possible to find the
right person. But the sight of Gerda decided me. I felt at
once that she was the only one for me: though I know there
are people in town who don’t care for my taste. She is
a wonderful creature; there are few like her in the world.
She is nothing like you, Tony, to be sure. You are simpler,
and more natural too. My lady sister is simply more temperamental,”
he continued, suddenly taking a lighter tone.
“Oh, Gerda has temperament too—her playing shows that;
but she can sometimes be a little cold. In short, she is not
to be measured by the ordinary standards. She is an artist,
an individual, a puzzling, fascinating creature.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” Tony said. She had given her brother the
closest attention. It was nearly dark, and she had not thought
of lighting the lamps.</p>

<p>The corridor door opened, and there stood before them in
the twilight, in a pleated piqué house-frock, white as snow,
a slender figure. The heavy dark-red hair framed her white
face, and blue shadows lay about her close-set brown eyes.
It was Gerda, mother of future Buddenbrooks.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">
<p></p>

<h2 class="nobreak">PART SIX</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Thomas Buddenbrook</span> took a solitary early breakfast in his
pretty dining-room. His wife usually left her room late, as
she was subject to headaches and vapours in the morning.
The Consul went at once to Meng Street, where the offices
still were, took his second breakfast with his mother, Christian
and Ida Jungmann in the entresol, and met Gerda only
at dinner, at four in the afternoon.</p>

<p>The ground floor of the old house still preserved the life
and movement of a great business; but the upper storeys were
empty and lonely. Little Erica had been received as a boarder
by Mademoiselle Weichbrodt, and poor Clothilde had moved
with her few sticks of furniture into a cheap pension with
the widow of a high-school teacher, a Frau Dr. Krauseminz.
Even Anton had left the house, and gone over to the young
pair, where he was more needed. When Christian was at the
club, the Frau Consul and Ida Jungmann sat at four o’clock
dinner alone at the round table, in which there was now not
a single extra leaf. It looked quite lost in the great spaces
of the dining-temple with its images of the gods.</p>

<p>The social life of Meng Street had been extinguished with
the death of Consul Johann Buddenbrook. Except for the
visits of this or that man of God, the Frau Consul saw no
guests but the members of her family, who still came on
Thursday afternoons. But the first great dinner had already
been given by the young pair in Broad Street. Tables were
laid in both dining- and living-room, and there were a hired
cook and waiters and Kistenmaker wines. It began at five
o’clock, and its sounds and smells were still in the air at
eleven. All the business and professional men were present,
married pairs and bachelors as well: all the tribe of Langhals,
Hagenströms, Huneus’, Kistenmakers, Överdiecks, and Möllendorpfs.
It finished off with whist and music. They talked
about it in glowing terms on the Bourse for a whole week.
The young Frau Consul certainly knew how to entertain!
When she and the Consul were alone, in the room lighted by
burned-down candles, with the furniture disarranged and the
air thick with heavy odours of rich food, wine, cigars, coffee,
perfume, and the scent of the flowers from the ladies’ toilettes
and the table decorations, he pressed her hand and said:
“Very good, Gerda. We do not need to be ashamed. This
sort of thing is necessary. I have no great fondness for balls,
and having the young people jumping about here; and, besides,
there is not room. But we must entertain the settled
people. A dinner like that costs a bit more—but it is well
spent.”</p>

<p>“You are right,” she had answered, and arranged the laces
through which her bosom shimmered like marble. “I much
prefer the dinners to the balls myself. A dinner is so soothing.
I had been playing this afternoon, and felt a little
queer. My brain feels quite dead now. If I were to be
struck by lightning I should not change colour.”</p>

<p>Next morning at half-past eleven the Consul sat down beside
his Mother at the breakfast-table, and she read a letter
aloud to him:</p>

<div class="blockquot">
<p class="right"><span class="smcap">Munich</span>, April 2, 1857<br/>
<span class="allsmcap"><span class="indentright2">MARIENPLATZ 5</span></span></p>

<p><span class="smcap">My dear Mother</span>,</p>

<p>I must beg your pardon—it is a shame that I have not
written before in the eight days I have been here. My time
has been so taken up with all the things there are to see—I’ll
tell you about them afterwards. Now I must ask if all
the dear ones, you and Tom and Gerda and Erica and Christian
and Tilda and Ida, are well—that is the most important
thing.</p>

<p>Ah, what all I have seen in these days!—the Pinakothek and
the Glyptothek and the Hofbräuhaus and the Court Theatre
and the churches, and quantities of other things! I must tell
you of them when I see you; otherwise I should kill myself
writing. We have also had a drive in the Isar valley, and
for to-morrow an excursion to the Wurmsee is arranged. So
it goes on. Eva is very sweet to me, and her husband, Herr
Niederpaur, the brewery superintendent, is an agreeable man.
We live in a very pretty square in the town, with a fountain
in the middle, like ours at home in the market place, and the
house is quite near the Town Hall. I have never seen such a
house. It is painted from top to bottom, in all colours—St.
Georges killing dragons, and old Bavarian princes in full robes
and arms. Imagine!</p>

<p>Yes, I like Munich extremely. The air is very strengthening
to the nerves, and for the moment I am quite in order
with my stomach trouble. I enjoy drinking the beer—I drink
a good deal, the more so as the water is not very good. But
I cannot quite get used to the food. There are too few vegetables
and too much flour, for instance in the sauces, which
are pathetic. They have no idea of a proper joint of veal,
for the butchers cut everything very badly. And I miss the
fish. It is quite mad to be eating so much cucumber and
potato salad with the beer—my tummy rebels audibly.</p>

<p>Yes, one has to get used to a great deal. It is a real foreign
country. The strange currency, the difficulty of understanding
the common people—I speak too fast to them and
they seem to talk gibberish to me—and then the Catholicism.
I hate it, as you know; I have no respect for it—</p>
</div>

<p>Here the Consul began to laugh, leaning back in the sofa
with a piece of bread and herb cheese in his hand.</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom, you are laughing,” said his Mother, and tapped
with her middle finger on the table. “But it pleases me very
much that she holds fast to the faith of her fathers and shuns
the unevangelical gim-crackery. I know that you felt a certain
sympathy for the papal church, while you were in France
and Italy: but that is not religion in you, Tom—it is something
else, and I understand what. We must be forbearing; yet
in these things a frivolous feeling of fascination is very
much to be regretted. I pray God that you and your Gerda,—for
I well know that she does not belong to those firm in the
faith—will in the course of time feel the necessary seriousness.
You will forgive your mother her words, I know.”</p>

<div class="blockquot">

<p>On top of the fountain (she continued reading) there is a
Madonna, and sometimes she is crowned with a wreath, and
the common people come with rose garlands and kneel down
and pray—which looks very pretty, but it is written: “Go
into your chamber.” You often see monks here in the street;
they look very respectable. But—imagine, Mamma!—yesterday
in Theatiner Street some high dignitary of the church
was driving past me in his coach; perhaps it was an archbishop;
anyhow, an elderly man—well, this gentleman throws
me an ogling look out of the window, like a lieutenant of the
Guard! You know, Mother, I’ve no great opinion of your
friends the ministers and missionaries, but Teary Trieschke
was certainly nothing compared to this rakish old prince of
the Church.</p>
</div>

<p>“Horrors!” interjected the Frau Consul, shocked.</p>

<p>“That’s Tony, to the life,” said the Consul.</p>

<p>“How is that, Tom?”</p>

<p>“Well, perhaps she just invited him a trifle—to try him,
you know. I know Tony. And I am sure the ‘ogling look’
delighted her hugely, which was probably what the old gentleman
wanted.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul did not take this up, but continued to
read:</p>

<div class="blockquot">

<p>Day before yesterday the Niederpaurs entertained in the
evening. It was lovely, though I could not always follow
the conversation, and I found the tone sometimes rather questionable.
There was a singer there from the Court opera, who
sang songs, and a young artist, who asked me to sit for him,
which I refused, as I thought it not suitable. I enjoyed myself
most with a Herr Permaneder. Would you ever think there
could be such a name? He is a hop dealer, a nice, jolly
man, in middle life and a bachelor. I had him at table, and
stuck to him, for he was the only Protestant in the party. He
is a citizen of Munich, but his family comes from Nuremberg.
He assured me that he knew our firm very well by name, and
you can imagine how it pleased me, Tom, to hear the respectful
tone in which he said that. He asked how many there are
of us, and things like that. He asked about Erica and Grünlich
too. He comes sometimes to the Niederpaurs’, and is
probably going to-morrow to Wurmsee with us.</p>

<p>Well, adieu, dear Mamma; I can write no more. If I live
and prosper, as you always say, I shall stop here three or
four weeks more, and when I come back I will tell you more
of Munich, for in a letter it is hard to know where to begin.
I like it very much; that I must say—though one would have
to train a cook to make decent sauces. You see, I am an old
woman, with my life behind me, and I have nothing more to
look forward to on earth. But if, for example, Erica should—if
she lives and prospers—marry here, I should have nothing
against it; that I must say.</p>
</div>

<p>Again the Consul was obliged to stop eating and lean back
in his chair to laugh.</p>

<p>“She is simply priceless, Mother. And when she tries to
dissimulate, she is incomparable. She is a thousand miles
away from being able to carry it off.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom,” said the Frau Consul, “she is a good child,
and deserves good fortune.” And she finished the letter.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">At</span> the end of April Frau Grünlich returned home. Another
epoch was behind her, and the old existence began again—attending
the daily devotions and the Jerusalem evenings and
hearing Lea Gerhardt read aloud. Yet she was obviously in
a gay and hopeful mood.</p>

<p>Her brother, the Consul, fetched her from the station—she
had come from Buchen—and drove her through the Holsten
Gate into the town. He could not resist paying her the old
compliment—how, next to Clothilde, she was the prettiest one
in the family; and she answered: “Oh, Tom, I hate you!
To make fun of an old lady like that—”</p>

<p>But he was right, nevertheless: Madame Grünlich kept her
good looks remarkably. You looked at the thick ash-blonde
hair, rolled at the sides, drawn back above the little ears, and
fastened on the top of the head with a broad tortoise-shell
comb; at the soft expression of her grey-blue eyes, her pretty
upper lip, the fine oval and delicate colour of her face—and
you thought of three-and-twenty, perhaps; never of thirty.
She wore elegant hanging gold earrings, which, in a somewhat
different form, her grandmother had worn before her.
A loose bodice of soft dark silk, with satin revers and flat
lace epaulettes, gave her pretty bosom an enchanting look of
softness and fulness.</p>

<p>She was in the best of tempers. On Thursday, when Consul
Buddenbrook and the ladies from Broad Street, Consul Kröger,
Clothilde, Sesemi Wiechbrodt and Erica came to tea, she
talked vividly about Munich. The beer, the noodles, the
artist who wanted to paint her, and the court coaches had made
the greatest impressions. She mentioned Herr Permaneder in
passing; and Pfiffi Buddenbrook let fall a word or two to the
effect that such a journey might be very agreeable, but did
not seem to have any practical results. Frau Grünlich passed
this by with dignity, though she put back her head and tucked
in her chin. She fell into the habit now, whenever the vestibule
bell rang through the entry, of hurrying to the landing
to see who had come. What might that mean? Probably
only Ida Jungmann, Tony’s governess and year-long confidante,
knew that. Ida would say, “Tony, my child, you will
see: he’ll come.”</p>

<p>The family was grateful to the returned traveller for her
cheering presence; for the atmosphere of the house sadly
needed brightening. The relations between the head of the
firm and his younger brother had not improved. Indeed,
they had grown sadly worse. Their Mother, the Frau Consul,
followed with anxious misgivings the course of events and
had enough to do to mediate between the two. Her hints to
visit the office more regularly were received in absent silence
by Christian. He met his brother’s remonstrances with a mortified
air, making no defence, and for a few days would apply
himself with somewhat more zeal to the English correspondence.
But there developed more and more in the elder an irritated
contempt for the younger brother, not decreased by the
fact that Christian received his occasional rebukes without
seeming offence, only looking at him with the usual absent
disquiet in his eyes.</p>

<p>Tom’s irritable activity and the condition of his nerves
would not let him listen sympathetically or even patiently to
Christian’s detailed accounts of his increasing symptoms. To
his mother or sister, he referred to them with disgust as “the
silly phenomena of an obstinate introspection.”</p>

<p>The ache, the indefinite ache in Christian’s left leg, had
yielded by now to treatment; but the trouble in swallowing
came on often at table, and there was lately a difficulty in
breathing, an asthmatic trouble, which Christian thought for
several weeks was consumption. He explained its nature and
activity at length to his family, his nose wrinkled up the
while. Dr. Grabow was called in. He said the heart and
lungs were operating soundly, but the occasional difficulty in
breathing was due to muscular sluggishness, and ordered first
the use of a fan and secondly that of a green powder which
one burned, inhaling the smoke. Christian used the fan in
the office, and to a remonstrance on the part of the chief answered
that in Valparaiso every man in the office was provided
with a fan on account of the heat: “Johnny Thunderstorm—good
God!” But one day, after he had been wriggling
about on his chair for some time, nervous and restless, he took
his powder out of his pocket and made such a strong and
violent-smelling reek in the room that some of the men began
to cough violently, and Herr Marcus grew quite pale. There
was an open explosion, a scandal, a dreadful talking-to which
would have led to a break at once, but that the Frau Consul
once more covered everything all up, reasoned them out of it,
and set things going again.</p>

<p>But this was not all. The life Christian led outside the
house, mainly with his old schoolmate Lawyer Gieseke, was
observed by the Consul with disgust. He was no prig, no
spoil-sport. He knew very well that his native town, this
port and trading city, where men walked the streets proud of
their irreproachable reputation as business men, was by no
means of spotless morality. They made up to themselves for
the tedious hours spent in their offices, by dinners with heavy
wines and heavy dishes—and by other things. But the broad
mantle of civic respectability concealed this side of their life.
Thomas Buddenbrook’s first law was to preserve “the <i>dehors</i>”;
wherein he showed himself not so different from his fellow
burghers. Lawyer Gieseke was a member of the professional
class, whose habits of life were much like those of the merchants.
That he was also a “good fellow,” anybody could see
who looked at him. But, like the other easy men of pleasure
in the community, he knew how to avoid trouble by wearing
the proper expression and saying the proper thing. And in
political and professional matters, he had a reputation of irreproachable
respectability. His betrothal to Fräulein Huneus
had just been announced; whereby he married a considerable
dowry and a place in the best society. He was active in civic
affairs, and he had his eye on a seat in the Council—even,
ultimately, on the seat of old Burgomaster Överdieck.</p>

<p>But his friend Christian Buddenbrook—the same who could
go calmly up to Mlle. Meyer-de-la-Grange, present her his
bouquet, and say, “Oh, Fräulein, how beautifully you act!”—Christian
had been developed by character and circumstances
into a free-liver of the naïve and untrammeled type. In affairs
of the heart, as in all others, he was disinclined to govern
his feelings or to practise discretion for the sake of preserving
his dignity. The whole town had laughed over his affair with
an obscure actress at the summer theatre. Frau Stuht in Bell
Founders’ Street—the same who moved in the best society—told
everybody who would listen how Chris had been seen
again walking by daylight in the open street with the person
from the Tivoli.</p>

<p>Even that did not actually offend people. There was too
much candid cynicism in the community to permit a display
of serious moral disapproval. Christian Buddenbrook, like
Consul Peter Döhlmann—whose declining business put him
into somewhat the same artless class—was a popular entertainer
and indispensable to gentlemen’s companions. But
neither was taken seriously. In important matters they
simply did not count. It was a significant fact that the whole
town, the Bourse, the docks, the club, and the street called
them by their first names—Peter and Chris. And enemies,
like the Hagenströms, laughed not only at Chris’s stories and
jokes; but at Chris himself, too.</p>

<p>He thought little or nothing of this. If he noticed it, it
passed out of his mind again after a momentary disquiet. But
his brother the Consul knew it. Thomas knew that Christian
afforded a point of attack to the enemies of the family—and
there were already too many such points. The connection
with the Överdiecks was distant and would be quite worthless
after the Burgomaster’s death. The Krögers played no rôle
now; they lived retired, after the misfortunes with their son.
The marriage of the deceased uncle Gotthold was always unpleasant.
The Consul’s sister was a divorced wife, even if one
did not quite give up hope of her re-marrying. And his
brother was a laughing-stock in the town, a man with whose
clownishness industrious men amused their leisure and then
laughed good-naturedly or maliciously. He contracted debts,
too, and at the end of the quarter, when he had no more
money, would quite openly let Dr. Gieseke pay for him—which
was a direct reflection on the firm. Thomas’s contemptuous
ill will, which Christian bore with quiet indifference,
expressed itself in all the trifling situations that come up between
members of a family. If the conversation turned upon
the Buddenbrook family history, Christian might be in the
mood to speak with serious love and admiration of his native
town and of his ancestors. It sat rather oddly on him, to be
sure, and the Consul could not stand it: he would cut short
the conversation with some cold remark. He despised his
brother so much that he could not even permit him to love
where he did. If Christian had uttered the same sentiments
in the dialect of Marcellus Stengel, Tom could have borne it
better. He had read a book, a historical work, which had
made such a strong impression on him that he spoke about it
and praised it in the family. Christian would by himself
never have found out the book; but he was impressionable
and accessible to every influence; so he also read it, found it
wonderful, and described his reactions with all possible detail.
That book was spoiled for Thomas for ever. He spoke
of it with cold and critical detachment. He pretended
hardly to have read it. He completely gave it over to his
brother, to admire all by himself.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Consul Buddenbrook</span> came from the “Harmony”—a reading-club
for men, where he had spent the hour after second breakfast—back
into Meng Street. He crossed the yard from behind,
entered the side of the garden by the passage which ran
between vine-covered walls and connected the back and front
courtyards, and called into the kitchen to ask if his brother
were at home. They should let him know when he came in.
Then he passed through the office (where the men at the desks
bent more closely over their work) into the private room;
he laid aside his hat and stick, put on his working coat,
and sat down in his place by the window, opposite Herr Marcus.
Between his pale eyebrows were two deep wrinkles.
The yellow end of a Russian cigarette roamed from one corner
of his mouth to the other. The movements with which he
took up paper and writing materials were so short and jerky
that Herr Marcus ran his two fingers up and down his beard
and gave his colleague a long, scrutinizing look. The younger
men glanced at him with raised eyebrows. The Head was
angry.</p>

<p>After half an hour, during which nothing was heard but the
scratching of pens and the sound of Herr Marcus discreetly
clearing his throat, the Consul looked over the green half-blind
and saw Christian coming down the street. He was
smoking. He came from the club, where he had eaten and
also played a bit. He wore his hat a little awry on his head,
and swung his yellow stick, which had come from “over
there” and had the bust of a nun for a handle. He was obviously
in good health and the best of tempers. He came humming
into the office, said “Good morning, gentlemen,” although
it was a bright spring afternoon, and took his place to
“do a bit of work.” But the Consul got up and, passing him,
said without looking at him, “Oh, may I have a few words with
you?” Christian followed him. They walked rather rapidly
through the entry. Thomas held his hands behind his back,
and Christian involuntarily did the same, turning his big bony
hooked nose toward his brother. The red-blond moustache
drooped, English fashion, over his mouth. While they went
across the court, Thomas said: “We will walk a few steps up
and down the garden, my friend.”</p>

<p>“Good,” answered Christian. Then there was a long silence
again, while they turned to the left and walked, by the outside
way, past the rococo “portal” right round the garden,
where the buds were beginning to swell. Finally the Consul
said in a loud voice, with a long breath, “I have just been
very angry, on account of your behaviour.”</p>

<p>“My—?”</p>

<p>“Yes. I heard in the ‘Harmony’ about a remark of yours
that you dropped in the club last evening. It was so obnoxious,
so incredibly tactless, that I can find no words—the
stupidity called down a sharp snub on you at once. Do you
care to recall what it was?”</p>

<p>“I know now what you mean. Who told you that?”</p>

<p>“What has that to do with it? Döhlmann.—In a voice
loud enough so that all the people who did not already know
the story could laugh at the joke.”</p>

<p>“Well, Tom, I must say I was ashamed of Hagenström.”</p>

<p>“You were ashamed—<i>you</i> were—! Listen to me,” shouted
the Consul, stretching out both hands in front of him and
shaking them in excitement. “In a company consisting of
business as well as professional men, you make the remark, for
everybody to hear, that, when one really considers it, every
business man is a swindler—you, a business man yourself,
belonging to a firm that strains every nerve and muscle to
preserve its perfect integrity and spotless reputation!”</p>

<p>“Good heavens, Thomas, it was a joke!—although,
really—” Christian hesitated, wrinkling his nose and stooping
a little. In this position he took a few steps.</p>

<p>“A joke!” shouted the Consul. “I think I can understand a
joke, but you see how your joke was understood. ‘For my
part, I have the greatest respect for my calling.’ That was
what Hermann Hagenström answered you. And there you
sat, a good-for-nothing, with no respect for yours—”</p>

<p>“Tom, you don’t know what you are talking about. I assure
you he spoiled the whole joke. After everybody laughed,
as if they agreed with me, there sat this Hagenström and
brought out with ridiculous solemnity, ‘For my part—’ Stupid
fool! I was really ashamed for him. I thought about
it a long time in bed last night, and I had a quite remarkable
feeling—you know how it feels—”</p>

<p>“Stop chattering, stop chattering, I beg you,” interrupted
the Consul. He trembled with disgust in his whole body.
“I agree—I agree with you that his answer was not in the
right key, and that it was tasteless. But that is just the kind
of people you pick out to say such things to!—if it is necessary
to say them at all—and so you lay yourself open to an
insolent snub like that. Hagenström took the opening to—give
not only you but us a slap. Do you understand what
‘for my part’ meant? It meant: ‘You may have such ideas
going about in your brother’s office, Herr Buddenbrook.’
That’s what it meant, you idiot.”</p>

<p>“Idiot—?” said Christian. He looked disturbed and embarrassed.</p>

<p>“And finally, you belong not to yourself alone; I’m supposed
to be indifferent when you make yourself personally
ridiculous—and when don’t you make yourself personally ridiculous?”
Thomas cried. He was pale, and the blue veins
stood out on his narrow temples, from which the hair went
back in two bays. One of his light eyebrows was raised;
even the long, stiff pointed ends of his moustache looked
angry as he threw his words down at Christian’s feet on the
gravel with quick sidewise gestures. “You make yourself
a laughing-stock with your love affairs, your harlequinades,
your diseases and your remedies.”</p>

<p>Christian shook his head vehemently and put up a warning
finger. “As far as that goes, Tom, you don’t understand very
well, you know. The thing is—every one must attend to his
own conscience, so to speak. I don’t know if you understand
that.—Grabow has ordered me a salve for the throat
muscles. Well—if I don’t use it, if I neglect it, I am quite
lost and helpless, I am restless and uncertain and worried
and upset, and I can’t swallow. But if I have been using it,
I feel that I have done my duty, I have a good conscience, I
am quiet and calm and can swallow famously. The salve
does not do it, you know, but the thing is that an idea like
that, you understand, can only be destroyed by another idea,
an opposite one. I don’t know whether you understand
me—”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes—oh, yes!” cried the Consul, holding his head for
a moment with both hands. “Do it, do it, but don’t talk
about it—don’t gabble about it. Leave other people alone
with your horrible nuances. You make yourself ridiculous
with your absurd chatter from morning to night. I must tell
you, and I repeat it, I am not interested in how much you
make a fool of yourself personally. But I forbid your compromising
the firm in the way you did yesterday evening.”</p>

<p>Christian did not answer, except to run his hand slowly
over his sparse red-brown locks, while his eyes roamed unsteadily
and absently, and unrest sat upon his face. Undoubtedly
he was still busy with the idea which he had just
been expressing.</p>

<p>There was a pause. Thomas stalked along with the calmness
of despair. “All business men are swindlers, you say,”
he began afresh. “Good. Are you tired of it? Are you
sorry you are a business man? You once got permission from
Father—”</p>

<p>“Why, Tom,” said Christian reflectively, “I would really
rather study. It must be nice to be in the university. One
attends when one likes, at one’s own free will, sits down and
listens, as in the theatre—”</p>

<p>“As in the theatre! Yes, I think your right place is that of
a comedian in a café chantant. I am not joking. I am perfectly
convinced that is your secret ideal.” Christian did not
deny it; he merely gazed aimlessly about. “And you have
the cheek to make such a remark—when you haven’t the
slightest notion of work, and spend your days storing up a
lot of feelings and sensations and episodes you hear in the
theatre and when you are loafing about, God knows where;
you take these and pet them and study them and chatter about
them shamelessly!”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom,” said Christian. He was a little depressed, and
rubbed his hand again over his head. “That is true: you have
expressed it quite correctly. That is the difference between
us. You enjoy the theatre yourself; and you had your little
affairs too, once on a time, between ourselves! And there
was a time when you preferred novels and poetry and all that.
But you have always known how to reconcile it with regular
work and a serious life. I haven’t that. I am quite used up
with the other; I have nothing left over for the regular life— I
don’t know whether you understand—”</p>

<p>“Oh, so you see that?” cried Thomas, standing still and
folding his arms on his breast. “You humbly admit that,
and still you go on the same old way? Are you a dog, Christian?
A man has some pride, by God! One doesn’t live a
life that one may not know how to defend oneself. But so
you are. That is your character. If you can only see a thing
and understand and describe it—. No, my patience is at an
end, Christian.” And the Consul took a quick backward step
and made a gesture with his arms straight out. “It is at an
end, I tell you.—You draw your pay, and stay away from
the office. That isn’t what irritates me. Go and trifle your
life away, as you have been doing, if you choose. But you
compromise us, all of us, wherever you are. You are a
growth, a fester, on the body of our family. You are a disgrace
to us here in this town, and if this house were mine, I’d
show you the door!” he screamed, making a wild sweeping
gesture over the garden, the court, and the whole property.
He had no more control of himself. A long-stored-up well of
hatred poured itself out.</p>

<p>“What is the matter with you, Thomas?” said Christian. He
was seized with unaccustomed anger, standing there in a
position common to bow-legged people, like a questionmark,
with head, stomach, and knees all prominent. His little deep
eyes were wide open and surrounded by red rims down to the
cheek-bones, as his Father’s used to be in anger. “How are
you speaking to me? What have I done to you? I’ll go,
without being thrown out. Shame on you!” he added with
downright reproach, accompanying the word with a short,
snapping motion in front of him, as if he were catching a
fly.</p>

<p>Strange to say, Thomas did not meet this outburst by more
anger. He bent his head and slowly took his way around
the garden. It seemed to quiet him, actually to do him good
to have made his brother angry at last—to have pushed him
finally to the energy of a protest.</p>

<p>“Believe me,” he said quietly, putting his hands behind his
back again, “this conversation is truly painful to me. But
it had to take place. Such scenes in the family are frightful,
but we must speak out once for all. Let us talk the thing
over quietly, young one. You do not like your present position,
it seems?”</p>

<p>“No, Tom; you are right about that. You see, at first I
was very well satisfied. I know I’m better off here than in a
stranger’s business. But what I want is the independence, I
think. I have always envied you when I saw you sit there
and work, for it is really no work at all for you. You work
not because you must, but as master and head, and let others
work for you, and you have the control, make your calculations,
and are free. It is quite different.”</p>

<p>“Good, Christian. Why couldn’t you have said that before?
You can make yourself free, or freer, if you like. You know
Father left you as well as me an immediate inheritance of
fifty thousand marks current; and I am ready at any moment
to pay out this sum for a reasonable and sound purpose. In
Hamburg, or anywhere else you like, there are plenty of safe
but limited firms where they could use an increase of capital,
and where you could enter as a partner. Let us think the
matter over quietly, each by himself, and also speak to Mother
at a good opportunity. I must get to work, and you could
for the present go on with the English correspondence.” As
they crossed the entry, he added, “What do you say, for instance,
to H. C. F. Burmeester and Company in Hamburg?
Import and export. I know the man. I am certain he would
snap at it.”</p>

<p>That was in the end of May of the year 1857. At the beginning
of June Christian travelled via Buchen to Hamburg—a
heavy loss to the club, the theatre, the Tivoli, and the liberal
livers of the town. All the “good fellows,” among them
Dr. Gieseke and Peter Döhlmann, took leave of him at the
station, and brought him flowers and cigars, and laughed to
split their sides—recalling, no doubt, all the stories Christian
had told them. And Lawyer Gieseke, amidst general applause,
fastened to Christian’s overcoat a great favour made out of
gold paper. This favour came from a sort of inn in the
neighbourhood of the port, a place of free and easy resort
where a red lantern burned above the door at night, and it
was always very lively. The favour was awarded to the departing
Chris Buddenbrook for his distinguished services.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> outer bell rang, and Frau Grünlich appeared on the
landing to look down into the court—a habit she had lately
formed. The door was hardly opened below when she started,
leaned over still more, and then sprang back with one hand
pressing her handkerchief to her mouth and the other holding
up her gown. She hurried upstairs.</p>

<p>On the steps to the second storey she met Ida Jungmann, to
whom she whispered in a suffocated voice. Ida gave a joyous
shriek and answered with some Polish gibberish.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul was sitting in the landscape-room, crocheting
a shawl or some such article with two large wooden
needles. It was eleven o’clock in the morning.</p>

<p>The servant came through the hall, knocked on the glass
door, and waddled in to bring the Frau Consul a visiting-card.
She took the card, got out her sewing-glasses, and read it.
Then she looked again at the girl’s red face; then read again;
then looked up again at the girl. Finally she said calmly but
firmly:</p>

<p>“What <i>is</i> this, my dear? What does it mean?”</p>

<p>On the card was printed: “X. Noppe and Company.”
The “X. Noppe” and the “and” were crossed out with a lead-pencil,
so that only the “Company” was left. “Oh, Frau
Consul,” said the maid, “there’s a gentleman, but he doesn’t
speak German, and he do go on so—”</p>

<p>“Ask the gentleman in,” said the Frau Consul; for she
understood now that it was the “Company” who desired admittance.
The maid went. Then the glass door was opened
again to let in a stocky figure, who remained in the shadowy
background of the room for a moment and said with a drawling
pronunciation something that seemed as if it might have
been: “I have the honour—”</p>

<p>“Good morning,” said the Frau Consul. “Will you not
come in?” And she supported herself on the sofa-cushion
and rose a little; for she did not know yet whether she ought
to rise all the way or not.</p>

<p>“I take the liberty,” replied the gentleman in a pleasant
sing-song; while he bowed in the politest manner, and took
two steps forward. Then he stood still again and looked
around as if searching for something—perhaps for a place to
put his hat and stick, for he had brought both—the stick being
a horn crutch with the top shaped like a claw and a good
foot and a half long—into the room with him.</p>

<p>He was a man of forty years. Short-legged and chubby, he
wore a wide-open coat of brown frieze and a light flowered
waistcoat which covered the gentle protuberant curve of his
stomach and supported a gold watch-chain with a whole bouquet
of charms made of horn, bone, silver, and coral. His
trousers were of an indefinite grey-green colour and too short.
The material must have been extraordinarily stiff, for the
edges stood out in a circle around the legs of his short, broad
boots. He had a bullet head, untidy hair, and a stubby nose,
and the light-blond curly moustache drooping over his mouth
made him look like a walrus. By way of contrast, the imperial
between his chin and his underlip stood out rather
bristly. His cheeks were extremely fat and puffy, crowding
his eyes into two narrow light-blue cracks with wrinkles at
the corners. The whole face looked swollen and had a funny
expression of fierceness, mingled with an almost touching
good nature. Directly below his tiny chin a steep line ran
into the white neck-cloth: his goiterous neck could not have
endured a choker. In fact, the whole lower part of his face
and his neck, the back of his head, his cheeks and nose, all
ran rather formlessly in together. The whole skin of the
face was stretched to an immoderate tightness and showed
a roughness at the ear-joinings and the sides of the nose. In
one of his short fat white hands the visitor held his stick; in
the other his green Tyrolese hat, decorated with a chamois
beard.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul had taken off her glasses and was still
rising from her sofa-pillow.</p>

<p>“What can I do for you?” she asked politely but pointedly.</p>

<p>The gentleman, with a movement of decision, laid his hat
and stick on the lid of the harmonium. He rubbed his free
hands with satisfaction and looked at the Frau Consul out
of his kindly, light-blue eyes. “I beg the gracious lady’s
pardon for the card,” he said. “I had no other by me. My
name is Permaneder—Alois Permaneder, from Munich. Perhaps
you might have heard my name from your daughter.”
He said all this in a puzzling dialect with a rather loud,
coarse voice; but there was a confidential gleam from the
cracks of his eyes, which seemed to say: “I’m sure we understand
each other already.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul had now risen entirely and went forward
with her hand outstretched and her head inclined in
greeting.</p>

<p>“Herr Permaneder! Is it you? Certainly my daughter
has spoken of you. I know how much you contributed to
make her visit in Munich pleasant and entertaining. And
so some wind has blown you all the way up here?”</p>

<p>“That’s it; you’re just right there,” said Herr Permaneder.
He sat down by the Frau Consul in the arm-chair which she
gracefully indicated to him, and began to rub his short round
thighs comfortably with both hands.</p>

<p>“I beg your pardon?” asked the Frau Consul. She had not
understood a single word of his remark.</p>

<p>“You’ve guessed it, that’s the point,” answered Herr Permaneder,
as he stopped rubbing his knees.</p>

<p>“How nice!” said the Frau Consul blankly. She leaned
back in her chair with feigned satisfaction and folded her
hands. Actually, she was quite as much at sea as before,
and inly wondering if Antonie were really able to follow the
windings of the Bavarian tongue. But Herr Permaneder—though
his appearance hardly led one to expect that he possessed
acute sensibilities—saw through her at once. He bent
forward, making—God knows why—circles in the air with his
hand, and, struggling after clarity, enunciated the words:
“The gracious lady is surprised?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Herr Permaneder, yes!” she cried, with disproportionate
joy, for she had really understood him. Perhaps
they could manage after all! But now there came a pause.
To fill it out, Herr Permaneder gave a sort of groan, and followed
it up by an exclamation in the broadest of dialect:
something that shocked the Frau Consul because it sounded
so like swearing, though it probably wasn’t—at least, she
hoped not! Should she ask him to repeat it?</p>

<p>“Ah—what did you say?” she ventured, turning her light
eyes a little away, that he might not see the bewilderment
they expressed.</p>

<p>Herr Permaneder obliged by repeating, with extraordinary
loudness and coarseness. Surely it was something about a
crucifix! Horrors!</p>

<p>“How nice!” she stammered again, with desperate finality;
and thus this subject also was disposed of. It might be
better to talk a little oneself. “May one ask,” she went on,
“what brings you so far, Herr Permaneder? It is a good
long journey from Munich!”</p>

<p>“A little business,” said Herr Permaneder, as before, and
waved his broad hand in the air. It was really touching, the
efforts he made. “A little business, my dear lady, with the
brewery at Walkmill.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes—you are hop merchants, of course, my dear Herr
Permaneder: Noppe and Company, isn’t it? I am sure I
have heard good things of your firm from my son,” said the
Frau Consul cordially. Again she felt as if she were almost
upon firm ground. Herr Permaneder waved away the
compliment. That was nothing to mention. No, the main
thing was, he wanted to pay his respects to the Frau Consul
and—see Frau Grünlich again. That was enough to make the
journey repay the trouble it cost.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul did not understand it all, but she got the
general drift, and was glad. “Oh, thank you,” she said, with
the utmost heartiness, and again offered him her hand, with
the palm outstretched.</p>

<p>“But we must call my daughter,” she added, and stood up
and went toward the embroidered bell-pull near the glass
door.</p>

<p>“Oh, Lord, yes, I’ll be glad to see her!” cried the hop
merchant, and turned his chair and himself toward the door
at one and the same time.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul said to the servant: “Ask Madame Grünlich
to come down, my dear.”</p>

<p>Then she went back to her sofa, and Herr Permaneder
turned himself and his chair around again.</p>

<p>“Lord, yes, I’ll be glad!” he repeated, while he stared at
the hangings and the furniture and the great Sèvres inkstand
on the secretary. But then he sighed heavily, several times
over, rubbed his knees, and gave vent to his favourite outlandish
phrase. The Frau Consul thought it more discreet
not to inquire again into his meaning; besides, he muttered
it under his breath, with a sort of groan, though his mood,
otherwise, appeared to be anything but despondent.</p>

<p>And now Frau Grünlich appeared. She had made a little
toilette, put on a light blouse, and dressed her hair. Her
face looked fresher and prettier than ever, and the tip of her
tongue played in the corner of her mouth.</p>

<p>Scarcely had she entered when Herr Permaneder sprang
up and went to meet her with tremendous enthusiasm. He
vibrated all over. He seized both her hands, shook them and
cried: “Well, Frau Grünlich! Well, well, <i>grüss Gott!</i>
Well, and how’s it been going with you? What you been
doing up here? Yes, yes! Grüss Gott! Lord, I’m just
silly glad to see you. Do you think sometimes of little old
Munich and what a gay time we had? Oh, my, oh my! And
here we are again. Who would ’a’ thought it?”</p>

<p>Tony, on her side, greeted him with great vivacity, drew
up a chair, and began to chat with him about her weeks in
Munich. Now the conversation went on without hitches, and
the Frau Consul followed it, smiling and nodding encouragingly
at Herr Permaneder. She would translate this or that
expression into her own tongue, and then lean back into the
sofa again, well pleased with her own intelligence.</p>

<p>Herr Permaneder had to explain to Frau Antonie in her
turn the reason of his appearance. But he laid small stress
on the “little business” with the brewery, and it was obviously
not the occasion of his visit at all. He asked with
interest after the second daughter and the sons of the Frau
Consul, and regretted loudly the absence of Clara and Christian,
as he had always wanted to get acquainted with the
whole family.</p>

<p>He said his stay in the town was of indefinite length,
but when the Frau Consul said: “I am expecting my son
for second breakfast at any moment, Herr Permaneder. Will
you give us the pleasure of your company?” he accepted the
invitation almost before she gave it, with such alacrity that
it was plain he had expected it.</p>

<p>The Consul came. He had found the breakfast-room empty,
and appeared in his office coat, tired and preoccupied, to
take a hasty bite. But when he saw the strange guest with
the frieze jacket and the fantastic watch-chain, he became all
charm. He had heard his name often enough from Frau
Antonie, and he threw a quick glance at his sister as he
greeted Herr Permaneder in his most fascinating manner. He
did not sit down. They went directly down to the entresol,
where Mamsell Jungmann had laid the table and set the samovar—a
real samovar, a present from Pastor Tiburtius and
Clara.</p>

<p>“You’ve got it good here,” said Herr Permaneder, as he
let himself down in his chair and looked at the variety of
cold meats on the table. His grammar, now and then, was
of the most artless and disarming quality.</p>

<p>“It isn’t Munich beer, of course, Herr Permaneder, but still
it is better than our domestic brew.” And the Consul poured
him a glass of the brown foaming porter, which he was
accustomed to drink himself at midday.</p>

<p>“Thank you kindly, neighbour,” said Herr Permaneder,
quite unaware of the outraged look Mamsell Jungmann cast
at him. But he drank so moderately of the porter that the
Frau Consul had a bottle of red wine brought up; whereat
he grew visibly gayer and began to talk with Frau Grünlich
again. He sat, on account of his prominent stomach, well
away from the table, with his legs far apart, and one of his
arms, with the plump white hand, hanging down over the
chair-back. He put his round head with its walrus moustache
on one side and blinked out of the cracks of his eyes naïvely
as he listened to Tony’s conversation. He looked offensively
comfortable. As he had had no experience with sprats, she
daintily dismembered them for him, commenting the while
on life in general.</p>

<p>“Oh Heavens, how sad it is, Herr Permaneder, that everything
good and lovely in this world is so fleeting,” she said,
referring to her Munich visit. She laid down her knife and
fork a moment and looked earnestly up at the ceiling. She
made charming if unsuccessful efforts to speak Bavarian.</p>

<p>During the meal there was a knock at the door, and the
office boy brought in a telegram. The Consul read it, letting
the long ends of his moustache run through his fingers. He
was plainly preoccupied with the contents of the message;
but, even as he read it, he asked in the easiest tone: “Well,
how is business, Herr Permaneder?—That will do,” he said
immediately to the apprentice, who disappeared.</p>

<p>“Oh, well, neighbour,” answered Herr Permaneder, turning
himself about toward the Consul’s side with the awkwardness
of a man who has a thick, stiff neck, and letting his
other arm hang over the chair-back. “There’s naught to
speak of—it’s a fair plague. You see, Munich”—he pronounced
the name of his native city in such a way that one
could only guess what he meant—“Munich is no commercial
town. Everybody wants his peace and quiet and his beer—nobody
gets despatches while he’s eating; not there. You’re
a different cut up here—Holy Sacrament! Yes, thank you
kindly, I’ll take another glass. Tough luck, that’s what it
is; tough luck. My partner, Noppe, wanted to go to Nuremberg,
because they have a Bourse there and are keen on business,
but I won’t forsake my Munich. Not me! That would
be a fine thing to do! You see, there’s no competition, and
the export trade is just silly. Even in Russia they’ll be beginning
soon to plant and build for themselves.”</p>

<p>Then he suddenly threw the Consul a quick, shrewd look
and said: “Oh, well, neighbour, ’tain’t so bad as it sounds.
Yon’s a fair little business. We make money with the joint-stock
brewery, that Niederpaur is director of. That was just
a small affair, but we’ve put it on its legs and lent it credit—cash
too, four per cent on security—and now we can do business
at a profit, and we’ve collared a blame good trade already.”
Herr Permaneder declined cigars and cigarettes and
asked leave to smoke his pipe. He drew the long horn bowl
out of his pocket, enveloped himself in a reek of smoke, and
entered upon a business conversation with the Consul, which
glided into politics, and Bavaria’s relations with Prussia, and
King Max, and the Emperor Napoleon. He garnished his
views with disjointed sighs and some perfectly unintelligible
Munich phrases.</p>

<p>Mamsell Jungmann, out of sheer astonishment, continually
forgot to chew, even when she had food in her mouth. She
blinked speechlessly at the guest out of her bright brown
eyes, standing her knife and fork perpendicularly on the table
and swaying them back and forth. This room had never before
beheld Herr Permaneder’s like. Never had it been filled
by such reeking pipe-smoke; such unpleasantly easy manners
were foreign to it. The Frau Consul abode in cordial miscomprehension,
after she had made inquiries and received information
as to the sufferings of the little protestant oasis
among the Munich papists. Tony seemed to grow somewhat
absent and restive in the course of the meal. But the Consul
was highly entertained, asked his mother to order up another
bottle of wine, and cordially invited Herr Permaneder to a
visit in Broad Street—his wife would be charmed. A good
three hours after his arrival the hop dealer began to show
signs of leaving—emptied his glass, knocked out his pipe,
called something or other “bad luck,” and got up.</p>

<p>“I have the honour, madame. Good day, Frau Grünli’
and Herr Consul—servant, servant.” At this Ida Jungmann
actually shivered and changed colour. “Good day, Freilein,”
he said to her, and he repeated “Good day” at the door.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul and her son exchanged a glance. Herr
Permaneder had announced his intention of stopping at the
modest inn on the Trave whither he had gone on arrival.
The Frau Consul went toward him again. “My daughter’s
Munich friend,” she began, “lives so far away that we shall
have no opportunity to repay her hospitality. But if you, my
dear sir, would give us the pleasure of your company while
you are in town—you would be very welcome.” She held
her hand out to him; and lo! Herr Permaneder accepted this
invitation as blithely as he had the one to dinner. He kissed
the hands of both ladies—and a funny sight he was as he
did so—fetched his hat and stick from the landscape-room,
and promised to have his trunk brought at once and to be
on the spot at four o’clock, after transacting his business.
Then he allowed the Consul to convoy him down the stairs.
But even at the vestibule door he turned again and shook
hands violently. “No offence, neighbour,” he said—“your
sister is certainly a great girl—no doubt about it. Good
day,” and he disappeared, still wagging his head.</p>

<p>The Consul felt an irresistible drawing to go up again and
see the ladies. Ida Jungmann had gone to look after the
linen for the guest-room. The Frau Consul still sat at the
breakfast-table, her light eyes fixed on a spot on the ceiling.
She was lightly drumming with her white fingers on the
cloth. Tony sat at the window, her arms folded, gazing
straight ahead of her with a severe air. Silence reigned.</p>

<p>“Well?” said Thomas, standing in the door and taking a
cigarette out of the box ornamented with the troika. His
shoulders shook with laughter.</p>

<p>“A pleasant man,” commented the Frau Consul innocently.</p>

<p>“Quite my opinion.” The Consul made a quick, humorous
turn toward Tony, as if he were asking her in the most respectful
manner for her opinion as well. She was silent, and
looked neither to the right nor to the left.</p>

<p>“But I think, Tom, he ought to stop swearing,” went on
the Frau Consul with mild disapproval. “If I understood
him correctly, he kept using the words Sacrament and Cross.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s nothing, Mother—he doesn’t mean anything by
that.”</p>

<p>“And perhaps a little too easy-mannered, Tom?”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes; that is south-German,” said the Consul, breathing
the smoke slowly out into the room. He smiled at his
mother and stole glances at Tony. His mother saw the glances
not at all.</p>

<p>“You will come to dinner to-day with Gerda. Please do
me the favour, Tom.”</p>

<p>“Certainly, Mother, with the greatest of pleasure. To tell
the truth, I promise myself much pleasure from this guest,
don’t you? He is something different from your ministers,
in any case.”</p>

<p>“Everybody to his taste, Tom.”</p>

<p>“Of course. I must go now.—Oh, Tony,” he said, the door-handle
in his hand, “you have made a great impression on
him. No, no joke. Do you know what he called you down
there just now? A great girl! Those were his very words.”</p>

<p>But here Frau Grünlich turned around and said clearly:
“Very good, Tom. You are repeating his words—and I don’t
know that he would mind; but even so I am not sure it was
just the nicest thing to do. But this much I do know: and
this much I am going to say: that in this life it does not depend
on how things are said and expressed, but on how they
are felt and meant in the heart; and if you make fun of
Herr Permaneder’s language and find him ridiculous—”</p>

<p>“Who? Why? Tony, what an idea! Why are you getting
excited—?”</p>

<p>“<i>Assez</i>,” said the Frau Consul, casting an imploring glance
at her son. It meant “Spare her!”</p>

<p>“Please don’t be angry, Tony,” he said. “I didn’t mean
to provoke you. And now I will go and see that somebody
from the warehouse brings Herr Permaneder’s trunk. Au
revoir.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Herr Permaneder</span> moved into Meng Street; he ate dinner
with Thomas Buddenbrook and his wife the following day;
and on the third, a Thursday, he made the acquaintance of
Justus Kröger and his wife, the three ladies from Broad
Street, who found him “frightfully funny” (they said fr-<i>right</i>-fully),
Sesemi Weichbrodt, who was rather stern with him,
and poor Clothilde and little Erica, to whom he gave a bag
of bonbons.</p>

<p>The man was invincibly good-humoured. His sighs, in fact,
meant nothing, and seemed to arise out of an excess of comfort.
He smoked his pipe, talked in his curious dialect, and
displayed an inexhaustible power of sitting still. He kept his
place long after the meal was finished, in the most easy attitude
possible, and smoked, drank, and chatted. His presence
gave to the life in the old home a new and strange tone; his
very being brought something unharmonious into the room.
But he disturbed none of the traditional customs of the house.
He was faithful to morning and evening prayers, asked permission
to attend one of the Frau Consul’s Sunday School
classes, and even appeared on a Jerusalem evening in the
drawing-room and was presented to the guests, but withdrew
affrighted when Lea Gerhardt began to read aloud.</p>

<p>He was soon known in the town. They spoke in the great
houses about the Buddenbrooks’ guest from Bavaria; but
neither in the family nor on the Bourse did he make connections,
and as it was already the time when people were
making ready to go to the shore, the Consul refrained from
introducing Herr Permaneder into society. But he devoted
himself with zeal to the guest, taking time from his business
and civic engagements to show him about the town and point
out the mediæval monuments—churches, gates, fountains,
market, Town Hall, and Ship Company. He made him acquainted
with his own nearest friends on Exchange and entertained
him in every way. His mother took occasion one
day to thank him for his self-sacrifice; but he only remarked
drily: “Why, ye-es, Mother—what wouldn’t one do?”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul left this unanswered. She did not even
smile or move her eyelids, but shifted the gaze of her light
eyes and changed the subject.</p>

<p>She preserved an even, hearty friendliness toward Herr
Permaneder—which could hardly be said of her daughter. On
the third or fourth day after his arrival the hop dealer let
it be known that he had concluded his business with the
local brewery. But a week and a half had passed since then,
and he had been present for two children’s afternoons. On
these occasions, Frau Grünlich had sat blushing and watching
his every motion, casting quick embarrassed glances at
Thomas and the three Buddenbrook cousins. She talked
hardly at all, sat for long minutes stiff and speechless, or
even got up and left the room.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>The green blinds in Frau Grünlich’s sleeping-room were
gently stirred by the mild air of a June night, for the windows
were open. It was a large room, with simple furniture
covered in grey linen. On the night-table at the side of the
high bed several little wicks burned in a glass with oil and
water in it, filling the room with faint, even light. Frau
Grünlich was in bed. Her pretty head was sunk softly in the
lace-edged pillow, and her hands lay folded on the quilted
coverlet. But her eyes, too thoughtful to close themselves,
slowly followed the movements of a large insect with a long
body, which perpetually besieged the glass with a million
soundless motions of his wings. Near the bed there was a
framed text hanging on the wall, between two old copper-plate
views of the town in the Middle Ages. It said: “Commit
your ways unto the Lord.” But what good is a text like
that when you are lying awake at midnight, and you have to
decide for your whole life, and other people’s too, whether
it shall be yes or no?</p>

<p>It was very still. The clock ticked away on the wall, and
the only other sound was Mamsell Jungmann’s occasional
cough. Her room was next to Tony’s, divided only by curtains
from it. She still had a light. The born-and-bred Prussian
was sitting under the hanging lamp at her extension-table,
darning stockings for little Erica. The child’s deep, peaceful
breathing could be heard in the room, for Sesemi’s pupils
were having summer holidays and Erica was at home again.</p>

<p>Frau Grünlich sighed and sat up a little, propping her head
on her hand. “Ida,” she called softly, “are you still sitting
there mending?”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, Tony, my child,” Ida answered. “Sleep now;
you will be getting up early in the morning, and you won’t
get enough rest.”</p>

<p>“All right, Ida. You will wake me at six o’clock?”</p>

<p>“Half-past is early enough, child. The carriage is ordered
for eight. Go on sleeping, so you will look fresh and pretty.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I haven’t slept at all yet.”</p>

<p>“Now, Tony, that is a bad child. Do you want to look
all knocked up for the picnic? Drink seven swallows of
water, and then lie down and count a thousand.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Ida, do come here a minute. I can’t sleep, I tell you,
and my head aches for thinking. Feel—I think I have some
fever, and there is something the matter with my tummy again.
Or is it because I am anæmic? The veins in my temples are
all swollen and they beat so that it hurts; but still, there may
be too little blood in my head.”</p>

<p>A chair was pushed back, and Ida Jungmann’s lean, vigorous
figure, in her unfashionable brown gown, appeared between
the portières.</p>

<p>“Now, now, Tony—fever? Let me feel, my child—I’ll
make you a compress.”</p>

<p>She went with her long firm masculine tread to the chest
for a handkerchief, dipped it into the water-basin, and, going
back to the bed, laid it on Tony’s forehead, stroking her
brow a few times with both hands.</p>

<p>“Thank you, Ida; that feels good.—Oh, please sit down a
few minutes, good old Ida. Sit down on the edge of the bed.
You see, I keep thinking the whole time about to-morrow.
What shall I do? My head is going round and round.”</p>

<p>Ida sat down beside her, with her needle and the stocking
drawn over the darner again in her hand, and bent over them
the smooth grey head and the indefatigable bright brown eyes.
“Do you think he is going to propose to-morrow?” she asked.</p>

<p>“No doubt of it at all. He won’t lose this opportunity.
It happened with Clara on just such an expedition. I could
avoid it, of course, I could keep with the others all the time
and not let him get near me. But then, that would settle
it! He is leaving day after to-morrow, he said, and he cannot
stay any longer if nothing comes of it to-day. It <i>must</i>
be decided to-day.—But what shall I say, Ida, when he asks
me? You’ve never been married, so of course you know nothing
about life, <i>really</i>; but you are a truthful woman, and you
have some sense—and you are forty-two years old! Do tell
me what you think.—I do so need advice!”</p>

<p>Ida Jungmann let the stocking fall into her lap.</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, Tony child, I have thought a great deal about
it. But what I think is, there is nothing to advise about. He
can’t go away without speaking to you and your Mamma,
and if you didn’t want him, you should have sent him away
before now.”</p>

<p>“You are right there, Ida; but I could not do it—I suppose
because it <i>is to be</i>! But now I keep thinking: ‘It isn’t too
late yet; I can still draw back!’ So I am living here tormenting
myself—”</p>

<p>“Do you like him, Tony? Tell me straight out.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Ida. It would not be the truth if I should say no.
He is not handsome—but that isn’t the important thing in this
life; and he is as good as gold, and couldn’t do anything
mean—at least, he seems so to me. When I think about
Grünlich—oh, goodness! He was all the time saying how
clever and resourceful he was, and all the time hiding his
villainy. Permaneder is not in the least like that. You
might say he is too easy-going and takes life too comfortably—and
that is a fault too; because he will never be a millionaire
that way, and he really is too much inclined to let
things go and muddle along—as they say down there. They
are all like that down there, Ida—that is what I mean. In
Munich, where he was among his own kind and everybody
spoke and looked as he does, I fairly loved him, he seemed so
nice and faithful and comfy. And I noticed it was mutual—but
part of that, I dare say, was that he takes me for a rich
woman, richer probably than I am; because Mother cannot
do much more for me, as you know. But I hardly think that
will make much difference to him—a great lot of money would
not be to his taste.—But—what was I saying, Ida?”</p>

<p>“That is in Munich, Tony. But here—”</p>

<p>“Oh, here, Ida! You know how it was already: up here
he was torn right out of his own element and set against
everybody here, and they are all ever so much stiffer, and—more
dignified and serious. Here I really often blush for
him, though it may be unworthy of me. You know—it
even happened several times that he said ‘me’ instead of ‘I.’
But they say that down there; even the most cultured people
do, and it doesn’t hurt anything—it slips out once in a while
and nobody minds. But up here—here sits Mother on one
side and Tom on the other, looking at him and lifting their
eyebrows, and Uncle Justus gives a start and fairly snorts,
the way the Krögers do, and Pfiffi Buddenbrook gives her
Mother a look, or Friederike or Henriette, and I feel so mortified
I want to run out of the room, and it doesn’t seem as if
I <i>could</i> marry him—”</p>

<p>“Oh, childie—it would be Munich that you would live in
with him.”</p>

<p>“You are right, Ida. But the engagement!—and if I have
to feel the whole time mortified to death before the family
and the Kistenmakers and the Möllendorpfs, because they
think he is common— Oh, Grünlich was much more refined,
though he was certainly black within, as Herr Stengel
would have said.—Oh, Ida, my head! do wet the compress
again.”</p>

<p>“But it must be so, in the end,” she went on again, drawing
a long breath as the compress went on; “for the main point
is and remains that I must get married again, and not stick
about here any longer as a divorced woman. Ah, Ida, I
think so much about the past these days: about the time when
Grünlich first appeared, and the scenes he made me—scandalous,
Ida!—and then about Travemünde and the Schwarzkopfs—”
She spoke slowly, and her eyes rested for a while
dreamily on a darn in Erica’s stocking. “And then the betrothal,
and Eimsbüttel, and our house. It was quite elegant,
Ida. When I think of my morning-gowns— It would not be
like that with Permaneder; one gets more modest as life goes
on— And Dr. Klaasen and the baby, and Banker Kesselmeyer—and
then the end. It was frightful; you can’t imagine
how frightful it was. And when you have had such dreadful
experiences in life— But Permaneder would never go in
for anything filthy like that. That is the last thing in the
world I should expect of him, and we can rely on him too in
a business way, for I really think he makes a good deal with
Noppe at the Niederpaur brewery. And when I am his wife,
you’ll see, Ida, I will take care that he has ambition and gets
ahead and makes an effort and is a credit to me and all of
us. <i>That</i>, at least, he takes upon himself when he marries a
Buddenbrook!”</p>

<p>She folded her hands under her head and looked at the
ceiling. “Yes, ten years ago and more, I married Grünlich.
Ten years! And here I am at the same place again, saying
yes to somebody else. You know, Ida, life is very, very
serious. Only the difference is that then it was a great affair,
and they all pressed me and tormented me, whereas now they
are all perfectly quiet and take it for granted that I am going
to say yes. Of course you know, Ida, that this engagement
to Alois—I say Alois, because of course it is to be—has
nothing very gay or festive about it, and it isn’t really a
question of my happiness at all. I am making this second
marriage with my eyes open, to make good the mistake of
my first one, as a duty which I owe our name. Mother thinks
so, and so does Tom.”</p>

<p>“But oh, dear, Tony—if you don’t like him, and if he won’t
make you happy—”</p>

<p>“Ida, I know life, and I am not a little goose any more.
I have the use of my senses. I don’t say that Mother would
actually insist on it—when there is a dispute over anything
she usually avoids it and says ‘<i>Assez!</i>’ But Tom wants it.
I know Tom. He thinks: ‘Anybody! Anybody who isn’t
absolutely impossible.’ For this time it is not a question of
a brilliant match, but just one that will make good the other
one. That is what he thinks. As soon as Permaneder appeared,
you may be sure that Tom made all the proper inquiries
about his business, and found it was all right—and
then, as far as he was concerned, the matter was settled.
Tom is a politician—he knows what he wants. Who was it
threw Christian out? That is strong language, Ida, but that
was really the truth of it. And why? Because he was compromising
the firm and the family. And in his eyes I do the
same thing—not with words or acts, but by my very existence
as a divorced woman. He wants that put an end to, and he is
right. I love him none the less for that—nor, I hope, does
he me. In all these years, I have always longed to be out in
the world again; it is so dull here in this house. God punish
me if that is a sin: but I am not much more than thirty, and I
still feel young. People differ about that. You had grey
hair at thirty, like all your family and that uncle that died
at Marienwerder.”</p>

<p>More and more observations of the same kind followed as
the night wore on; and every now and again she would say:
“It is to be, after all.” But at length she went to sleep, and
slept for five hours on end, deeply and peacefully.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">A mist</span> lay over the town. But—or so said Herr Longuet,
the livery man in John Street, as he himself drove the covered
char-à-banc up to the door of the house in Meng Street:
“The sun will be out before an hour is over”—which was
most encouraging.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul, Antonie, Herr Permaneder, Erica, and
Ida had breakfast together and gathered one after another,
ready for the expedition, in the great entry, to wait for Gerda
and Tom. Frau Grünlich, in a cream-coloured frock with
a satin tie, looked her best, despite the loss of sleep the night
before. Her doubts and fears seemed to be laid to rest, and
her manner was assured, calm, and almost formal as she
talked with their guest and fastened her glove-button. She
had regained the tone of the old days. The well-known conviction
of her own importance, of the weightiness of her own
decisions, the consciousness that once more a day had come
when she was to inscribe herself decisively in the family
history—all this filled her heart and made it beat higher. She
had dreamed of seeing that page in the family papers on
which she would write down the fact of her betrothal—the
fact that should obliterate and make void the black spot which
the page contained. She looked forward to the moment when
Tom would appear and she would greet him with a meaning
nod.</p>

<p>He came with his wife, somewhat tardily, for the young
Frau Consul was not used to make such an early toilette.
He looked well and happy in his light-brown checked suit,
the broad revers of which showed the white waistcoat beneath;
and his eyes had a smile in them as he noted Tony’s
incomparably dignified mien. Gerda, with her slightly exotic,
even morbid beauty, which was always in great contrast to her
sister-in-law’s healthy prettiness, was not in a holiday mood.
Probably she had risen too early. The deep lilac background
of her frock suited oddly with her dark-red hair and
made her skin look whiter and more even-toned than ever,
and the bluish shadows deeper and darker in the corners of
her close-set brown eyes. She rather coldly offered her
mother-in-law her brow to kiss, gave her hand to Herr Permaneder
with an almost ironical expression on her face, and
answered only by a deprecating smile when Tony clapped
her hands and cried out in her hearty way: “Oh, Gerda, how
<i>lovely</i> you always look!”</p>

<p>She had a real distaste for expeditions like to-day’s, especially
in summer and most especially on Sunday. She lived
in the twilight of her curtained living-rooms, and dreaded
the sun, the dust, the crowds of townsfolk in their holiday
clothes, the smell of coffee, beer, and tobacco; and above
everything else in the world she hated getting hot and upset.
When the expedition to Swartau and the “Giant Bush” was
arranged, in order to give the Munich guest a glimpse of the
surroundings of the old town, Gerda said lightly to her husband
“Dearest, you know how I am made: I only like
peace and quiet. I was not meant for change and excitement.
You’ll let me off, won’t you?”</p>

<p>She would not have married him if she had not felt sure
of his essential agreement with her in these matters.</p>

<p>“Oh, heavens, yes; you are right, of course, Gerda. It is
mostly imagination that one enjoys oneself on such parties.
Still, one goes, because one does not like to seem odd, either
to oneself or to the others. Everybody has that kind of
vanity; don’t you think so? People get the idea that you
are solitary or else unhappy, and they have less respect for
you. And then, there is something else, Gerda dear. We all
want to pay a little court to Herr Permaneder. Of course you
see what the situation is. Something is going on; it would
be a real pity if it came to nothing.”</p>

<p>“I do not see, my dear friend, why my presence—but no
matter. Let it be as you wish. Let us indulge.”</p>

<p>They went into the street. And the sun actually began at
that moment to pierce the morning mist. The bells of St.
Mary’s were ringing for Sunday, and the twittering of birds
filled the air. The coachman took off his hat, and the Frau
Consul greeted him with the patriarchal kindness which sometimes
put Thomas a little on edge: “Good morning, my
friend!—Well, get in now, my dears. It is just time for
early service, but to-day we will praise God with full hearts
in his own free out-of-doors; shall we not, Herr Permaneder?”</p>

<p>“That’s right, Frau Consul.”</p>

<p>They climbed one after another up the steps through the
narrow back door of the wagon and made themselves comfortable
on the cushioned seats, which—doubtless in honour
of Herr Permaneder—were striped blue and white, the Bavarian
colours. The door slammed, Herr Longuet clucked
to the horses and shouted “Gee” and “Haw,” the strong brown
beasts tugged at the harness, and the wagon rolled down
Meng Street along the Trave and out the Holsten gate
and then to the right along the Swartau Road.</p>

<p>Fields, meadows, tree-clumps, farmyards. They stared up
into the high, thin blue mist above them for the larks they
heard singing there. Thomas, smoking his cigarette, looked
about keenly, and when they came to the grain he called
Herr Permaneder’s attention to its condition. The hop dealer
was in a mood of childlike anticipation. He had perched
his green hat with the goat’s beard on the side of his head,
and was balancing his big stick with the horn handle on
the palm of his broad white hand and even on his underlip—a
feat which, though he never quite succeeded in accomplishing
it, was always greeted with applause from little Erica.
He repeated over and over remarks like: “’Twon’t be the
Zugspitz, but we’ll climb a bit and have a little lark—kind
of a little old spree, hey, Frau Grünli’?”</p>

<p>Then he began to relate with much liveliness stories of
mountain-climbing with knapsack and alpenstock, the Frau
Consul rewarding him with many an admiring “You don’t
say!” He came by some train of thought or other to Christian,
and expressed the most lively regret for his absence—he
had heard what a jolly chap he was.</p>

<p>“He varies,” the Consul said drily. “On a party like this
he is inimitable, it is true.—We shall have crabs to eat, Herr
Permaneder,” he said in a livelier tone; “crabs and Baltic
shrimps! You have had them a few times already at my
Mother’s, but friend Dieckmann, the owner of the ‘Giant
Bush,’ serves especially fine ones. And ginger-nuts, the
famous ginger-nuts of these parts. Has their fame reached
even as far as the Isar? Well, you shall try them.”</p>

<p>Two or three times Frau Grünlich stopped the wagon to
pick poppies and corn-flowers by the roadside, and each time
Herr Permaneder testified to his desire to get out and help
her, if it were not for his slight nervousness at climbing in
and out of the wagon.</p>

<p>Erica rejoiced at every crow she saw; and Ida Jungmann,
wearing her mackintosh and carrying her umbrella, as she always
did even in the most settled weather, rejoiced with her
like a good governess who shares not only outwardly but inwardly
in the childish emotions of her charge. She entered
heartily into Erica’s pleasure, with her rather loud laugh that
sounded like a horse neighing. Gerda, who had not seen her
growing grey in the family service, looked at her repeatedly
with cold surprise.</p>

<p>They were in Oldenberg. The beech groves came in sight.
They drove through the village, across the market square
with its well, and out again into the country, over the bridge
that spanned the little river Au, and finally drew up in front
of the one-storey inn, “The Giant Bush.” It stood at the side
of a flat open space laid out with lawns and sandy paths and
country flower-beds; beyond it, the forest rose gradually like
an amphitheatre. Each stage was reached by rude steps
formed from the natural rocks and tree roots; and on each
one white-painted tables, benches, and chairs stood placed
among the trees.</p>

<p>The Buddenbrooks were by no means the first guests. A
couple of plump maids and a waiter in a greasy dress-coat
were hurrying about the square carrying cold meat, lemonades,
milk, and beer up to the tables, even the more remote
ones, which were already occupied by several families with
children.</p>

<p>Herr Dieckmann, the landlord, appeared personally, in
shirt-sleeves and a little yellow-embroidered cap, to help
the guests dismount, and Longuet drove off to unhitch. The
Frau Consul said: “My good man, we will take our walk
first, and after an hour or so we should like luncheon served
up above—but not too high up; say perhaps at the second
landing.”</p>

<p>“You must show what you are made of, Herr Dieckmann,”
added the Consul. “We have a guest who is used to good
living.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no such thing,” Herr Permaneder protested. “A beer
and cheese—”</p>

<p>But Herr Dieckmann could not understand him, and began
with great fluency: “Everything we have, Herr Consul:
crabs, shrimps, all sorts of sausages, all sorts of cheese,
smoked eel, smoked salmon, smoked sturgeon—”</p>

<p>“Fine, Dieckmann; give us what you have. And then—six
glasses of milk and a glass of beer—if I am not mistaken,
Herr Permaneder?”</p>

<p>“One beer, six milks—sweet milk, buttermilk, sour milk,
clotted milk, Herr Consul?”</p>

<p>“Half and half, Herr Dieckmann: sweet milk and buttermilk.
In an hour, then.” They went across the square.</p>

<p>“First, Herr Permaneder, it is our duty to visit the spring,”
said Thomas. “The spring, that is to say, is the source of
the Au; and the Au is the tiny little river on which Swartau
lies, and on which, in the grey Middle Ages, our own town
was situated—until it burned down. There was probably
nothing very permanent about it at that time, and it was rebuilt
again, on the Trave. But there are painful recollections
connected with the Au. When we were schoolboys we used
to pinch each other’s arms and say: ‘What is the name of
the river at Swartau?’ Of course, it hurt, and the involuntary
answer was the right one.—Look!” he interrupted himself
suddenly, ten steps from the ascent, “they’ve got
ahead of us.” It was the Möllendorpfs and the Hagenströms.</p>

<p>There, on the third landing of the wooded terrace, sat the
principal members of those affiliated families, at two tables
shoved close together, eating and talking with the greatest
gusto. Old Senator Möllendorpf presided, a pallid gentleman
with thin, pointed white mutton-chops; he suffered from
diabetes. His wife, born Langhals, wielded her lorgnon; and,
as usual, her hair stood up untidily all over her head. Her
son Augustus was a blond young man with a prosperous exterior,
and there was Julie his wife, born Hagenström, little
and lively, with great blank black eyes and diamond earrings
that were nearly as large. She sat between her brothers,
Hermann and Moritz. Consul Hermann Hagenström had begun
to get very stout with good living: people said he began
the day with <i>paté de foie gras</i>. He wore a full, short
reddish-blond beard, and he had his mother’s nose, which
came down quite flat on the upper lip. Dr. Morris was narrow-chested
and yellow-skinned, and he talked very gaily,
showing pointed teeth with gaps between them. Both brothers
had their ladies with them—for the lawyer had married,
some years since, a Fräulein Puttfarken from Hamburg, a
lady with butter-coloured hair and wonderful cold, regular,
English features of more than common beauty; Dr. Hagenström
had not been able to reconcile with his reputation as
connoisseur the idea of taking a plain wife. And, finally,
there were the little daughter of Hermann and the little son
of Moritz, two white-frocked children, already as good as
betrothed to each other, for the Huneus-Hagenström money
must be kept together, of course. They all sat there eating
ham and scrambled eggs.</p>

<p>Greetings were exchanged when the Buddenbrook party
passed at a little distance the company seated at the table.
The Frau Consul bowed confusedly; Thomas lifted his hat,
his lips moving in a courteous and conventional greeting,
and Gerda inclined her head with formal politeness.
But Herr Permaneder, stimulated by the climb, swung his
green hat unaffectedly and shouted in a loud, hearty voice:
“Hearty good morning to all of you!” whereat Frau Senator
Möllendorpf made use of her lorgnon. Tony, for her part,
flung back her head and tucked in her chin as much as possible,
while her shoulders went up ever so slightly, and she
greeted the party as if from some remote height—which meant
that she stared straight ahead directly over the broad brim
of Julie Möllendorpf’s elegant hat. Precisely at this moment,
her decision of the night before became fixed, unalterable
resolve.</p>

<p>“Thanks be to goodness, Tom, we are not going to eat for
another hour. I’d hate to have that Julie watching us. Did
you see how she spoke? Hardly at all. I only had a glimpse
of her hat, but it looked frightfully bad taste.”</p>

<p>“Well, as far as that goes, I don’t know about the hat—but
you were certainly not much more cordial than she was, my
love. And don’t get irritated—it makes for wrinkles.”</p>

<p>“Irritated, Tom? Not at all. If these people think they
are the first and foremost, why, one can only laugh at them,
that’s all. What difference is there between this Julie and
me, if it comes to that? She only drew a fool, instead of a
knave, for a husband; and if she were in my position now, we
should see if she would find another one.”</p>

<p>“How can you tell that you will find another one?”</p>

<p>“A fool, Thomas?”</p>

<p>“Very much better than a knave.”</p>

<p>“It doesn’t have to be either. But it is not a fit subject
for discussion.”</p>

<p>“Quite right. The others are ahead of us—Herr Permaneder
is climbing lustily.”</p>

<p>The shady forest road grew level, and it was not long before
they reached the “spring,” a pretty, romantic spot with
a wooden bridge over a little ravine, steep cliffs, and overhanging
trees with their roots in the air. The Frau Consul
had brought a silver collapsible cup, and they scooped up
the water from the little stone basin directly under the source
and refreshed themselves with the iron-impregnated spring.
And here Herr Permaneder had a slight attack of gallantry,
and insisted on Frau Grünlich tasting his cup before presenting
it to him. He ran over with friendliness and displayed
great tact in chatting with the Frau Consul and Thomas, as
well as with Gerda and Tony, and even with little Erica.
Gerda, who had up to now been suffering from the heat and
a kind of silent and rigid nervousness, began to feel like herself
again. They came back to the inn by a shorter way, and
sat down at a groaning table on the second of the wooded
terraces; and it was Gerda who gave expression in friendly
terms to the general regret over Herr Permaneder’s early departure,
now that they were just becoming a little acquainted
and finding less and less difficulty with the language. She
was ready to swear that she had heard her friend and sister-in-law,
Tony, use several times the most unadulterated Munich
dialect!</p>

<p>Herr Permaneder forebore to commit himself on the subject
of his departure. Instead, he devoted himself for the time
to the dainties that weighted down the table—dainties such
as he seldom saw the other side of the Danube.</p>

<p>They sat and consumed the good things at their leisure—what
little Erica liked far better than anything else were the
serviettes made of tissue paper, much nicer than the big linen
ones at home. With the waiter’s permission she put a few
in her pocket as a souvenir. When they had finished, they
still sat; Herr Permaneder smoked several very black cigars
with his beer, Thomas smoked cigarettes, and the whole family
chatted a long time with their guest. It was noticeable that
Herr Permaneder’s leaving was not mentioned again; in fact,
the future was left shrouded in darkness. Rather, they turned
to memories of the past or talked of the political events of
recent years. Herr Permaneder shook with laughter over
some dozens of stories of the late Herr Consul, which his
widow related, and then in his turn told about the Munich
Revolution, and about Lola Montez, in whom Frau Grünlich
displayed an unbounded interest. The hour after luncheon
slowly wore on, and little Erica came back laden with daisies,
grasses, and ladies’ smocks from an expedition with Ida Jungmann,
and recalled the fact that the ginger-nuts were still to
be bought. They started on their walk down to the village,
not before the Frau Consul, who was the hostess of the occasion,
had paid the bill with a good-sized gold-piece.</p>

<p>They gave orders at the inn that the wagon should be
ready in half an hour, so that there would be time for a rest
in town before dinner, and then they rambled slowly down,
in the dusty sunshine, to the handful of cottages that formed
the village.</p>

<p>After they crossed the bridge they fell naturally into little
groups, in which they continued after that to walk: Mamsell
Jungmann with her long stride in the van, with little
Erica jumping tirelessly alongside, hunting for butterflies;
then the Frau Consul, Thomas, and Gerda together; and
lastly, at some distance, Frau Grünlich and Herr Permaneder.
The first pair made considerable noise, for the child shouted
for joy, and Ida joined in with her neighing, good-natured
laugh. In the middle, all three were silent; for the dust had
driven Gerda into another fit of depression, and the old Frau
Consul, and her son as well, were plunged in thought. The
couple behind were quiet too, but their quietness was only
apparent, for in reality Tony and her Bavarian guest were
conversing in subdued and intimate tones. And what was the
subject of their discourse? It was Herr Grünlich....</p>

<p>Herr Permaneder had made the pointed remark that little
Erica was a dear and pretty child, but that she had not the
slightest resemblance to her mother. To which Tony had
answered: “She is altogether like her father in looks, and
one may say that it is not at all to her disadvantage, for as
far as looks go, Grünlich was a gentleman. He had golden-yellow
whiskers—very uncommon; I never saw anything like
them.” When Tony visited the Niederpaurs in Munich, she
had already told Herr Permaneder in considerable detail the
story of her first marriage; but now he asked again all the
particulars of it, listening with anxiously sympathetic blinks
to the details of the bankruptcy.</p>

<p>“He was a bad man, Herr Permaneder, or Father would
never have taken me away from him—of that you may be sure.
Life has taught me that not everybody in the world has a
good heart. I have learned that, young as I am for a person
who, as you might say, has been a widow for ten years. He
was a bad man, and his banker, Kesselmeyer, was a worse
one—and a silly puppy into the bargain. I won’t say that
I consider myself an angel and perfectly free from all blame—don’t
misunderstand me. Grünlich neglected me, and even
when he was with me he just sat and read the paper; and he
deceived me, and kept me in Eimsbüttel, because he was
afraid if I went to town I would find out the mess he was
in. But I am a weak woman, and I have my faults too, and
I’ve no doubt I did not always go the right way to work. I
know I gave him cause to worry and complain over my extravagance
and silliness and my new dressing-gowns. But it
is only fair to say one thing: I was just a child when I
was married, a perfect goose, a silly little thing. Just imagine:
only a short time before I was engaged, I didn’t even so
much as know that the Confederation decrees concerning the
universities and the press had been renewed four years before!
And fine decrees they were, too! Ah, me, Herr Permaneder!
The sad thing is that one lives but once—one can’t
begin life over again. And one would know so much better
the second time!”</p>

<p>She was silent; she looked down at the road—but she was
very intent on the reply Herr Permaneder would make, for
she had not unskilfully left him an opening, it being only
a step to the idea that, even though it was impossible to begin
life anew, yet a new and better married life was not out
of the question. Herr Permaneder let the chance slip and
confined himself to laying the blame on Herr Grünlich, with
such violence that his very chin-whiskers bristled.</p>

<p>“Silly ass! If I had the fool here I’d give it to him!
What a swine!”</p>

<p>“Fie, Herr Permaneder! No, you really mustn’t. We
must forgive and forget—‘Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord.’
Ask Mother. Heaven forbid—I don’t know where Grünlich
is, nor what state his affairs are in, but I wish him the best
of fortune, even though he doesn’t deserve it.”</p>

<p>They had reached the village and stood before the little
house which was at the same time the bakery. They had
stopped walking, almost without knowing it, and were hardly
aware that Ida, Erica, the Frau Consul, Thomas, and Gerda
had disappeared through the funny, tiny little door, so low
that they had to stoop to enter. They were absorbed in their
conversation, though it had not got beyond these trifling preliminaries.</p>

<p>They stood by a hedge with a long narrow flower-bed beneath
it, in which some mignonette was growing. Frau
Grünlich, rather hot, bent her head and poked industriously
with her parasol in the black loam. Herr Permaneder stood
close to her, now and then assisting her excavations with
his walking-stick. His little green hat with the tuft of goat’s
beard had slid back on his forehead. He was stooping over
the bed too, but his small, bulging pale-blue eyes, quite blank
and even a little reddish, gazed up at her with a mixture of
devotion, distress, and expectancy. It was odd to see how his
very moustache, drooping down over his mouth, took the
same expression.</p>

<p>“Likely, now,” he ventured, “likely, now, ye’ve taken a
silly fright, and are too damned scared of marriage ever to
try it again—hey, Frau Grünlich?”</p>

<p>“How clumsy!” thought she. “Must I say yes to that?”
Aloud she answered: “Well, dear Herr Permaneder, I must
confess that it would be hard for me to yield anybody my consent
for life; for life has taught me, you see, what a serious
step that is. One needs to be sure that the man in question is
a thoroughly noble, good, kind soul—”</p>

<p>And now he actually ventured the question whether she
could consider him such a man—to which she answered:
“Yes, Herr Permaneder, I do.” Upon which there followed
the few short murmured words which clinched the betrothal
and gave Herr Permaneder the assurance that he might
speak to Thomas and the Frau Consul when they reached
home.</p>

<p>When the other members of the party came forth, laden
with bags of ginger-nuts, Thomas let his eye rove discreetly
over the heads of the two standing outside, for they were embarrassed
to the last degree. Herr Permaneder simply made
no effort to conceal the fact, but Tony was hiding her embarrassment
under a well-nigh majestic dignity.</p>

<p>They hurried back to the wagon, for the sky had clouded
over and some drops began to fall.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Tony was right: her brother had, soon after Herr Permaneder
appeared, made proper inquiries as to his situation in
life. He learned that X. Noppe and Company did a
thoroughly sound if somewhat restricted business, operating
with the joint-stock brewery managed by Herr Niederpaur as
director. It showed a nice little income, Herr Permaneder’s
share of which, with the help of Tony’s seventeen thousand,
would suffice for a comfortable if modest life. The Frau
Consul heard the news, and there was a long and particular
conversation among her, Herr Permaneder, Antonie, and
Thomas, in the landscape-room that very evening, and everything
was arranged. It was decided that little Erica should
go to Munich too, this being her Mother’s wish, to which her
betrothed warmly agreed.</p>

<p>Two days later the hop dealer left for home—“Noppe will
be raising the deuce if I don’t,” he said. But in July Frau
Grünlich was again in his native town, accompanied by Tom
and Gerda. They were to spend four or five weeks at Bad
Kreuth, while the Frau Consul with Erica and Ida were on
the Baltic coast. While in Munich, the four had time to see
the house in Kaufinger Street which Herr Permaneder was
about to buy. It was in the neighbourhood of the Niederpaurs’—a
perfectly remarkable old house, a large part of
which Herr Permaneder thought to let. It had a steep, ladderlike
pair of stairs which ran without a turning from the
front door straight up to the first floor, where a corridor led
on each side back to the front rooms.</p>

<p>Tony went home the middle of August to devote herself to
her trousseau. She had considerable left from her earlier
equipment, but new purchases were necessary to complete it.
One day several things arrived from Hamburg, among them a
morning-gown—this time not trimmed with velvet but with
bands of cloth instead.</p>

<p>Herr Permaneder returned to Meng Street well on in the
autumn. They thought best to delay no longer. As for the
wedding festivities, they went off just as Tony expected and
desired, no great fuss being made over them. “Let us leave
out the formalities,” said the Consul. “You are married
again, and it is simply as if you always had been.” Only a
few announcements were sent—Madame Grünlich saw to it
that Julie Möllendorpf, born Hagenström, received one—and
there was no wedding journey. Herr Permaneder objected to
making “such a fuss,” and Tony, just back from the summer
trip, found even the journey to Munich too long. The wedding
took place, not in the hall this time, but in the church of
St. Mary’s, in the presence of the family only. Tony wore
the orange-blossom, which replaced the myrtle, with great
dignity, and Doctor Kölling preached on moderation, with as
strong language as ever, but in a weaker voice.</p>

<p>Christian came from Hamburg, very elegantly dressed,
looking a little ailing but very lively. He said his business
with Burmeester was “top-top”; thought that he and Tilda
would probably get married “up there”—that is to say, “each
one for himself, of course”; and came very late to the wedding
from the visit he paid at the club. Uncle Justus was much
moved by the occasion, and with his usual lavishness presented
the newly-wedded pair with a beautiful heavy silver
epergne. He and his wife practically starved themselves at
home, for the weak woman was still paying the disinherited
and outcast Jacob’s debts with the housekeeping money.
Jacob was rumoured to be in Paris at present. The Buddenbrook
ladies from Broad Street made the remark: “Well,
let’s hope it will last, this time.” The unpleasant part of
this lay in the doubt whether they really hoped it. Sesemi
Weichbrodt stood on her tip-toes, kissed her pupil, now Frau
Permaneder, explosively on the forehead, and said with her
most pronounced vowels: “Be happy, you go-od che-ild!”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> the morning at eight o’clock Consul Buddenbrook, so soon
as he had left his bed, stolen through the little door and down
the winding stair into the bathroom, taken a bath, and put on
his night-shirt again—Consul Buddenbrook, we say, began to
busy himself with public affairs. For then Herr Wenzel,
barber and member of the Assembly, appeared, with his intelligent
face and his red hands, his razors and other tools,
and the basin of warm water which he had fetched from the
kitchen; and the Consul sat in a reclining-chair and leaned
his head back, and Herr Wenzel began to make a lather; and
there ensued almost always a conversation that began with the
weather and how you had slept the night before, went on to
politics and the great world, thence to domestic affairs in the
city itself, and closed in an intimate and familiar key on
business and family matters. All this prolonged very much
the process in hand, for every time the Consul said anything
Herr Wenzel had to stop shaving.</p>

<p>“Hope you slept well, Herr Consul?”</p>

<p>“Yes, thanks, Wenzel. Is it fine to-day?”</p>

<p>“Frost and a bit of snow, Herr Consul. In front of St.
James’s the boys have made another slide, more than ten yards
long—I nearly sat down, when I came from the Burgomaster’s.
The young wretches!”</p>

<p>“Seen the papers?”</p>

<p>“The <i>Advertiser</i> and the <i>Hamburg News</i>—yes. Nothing in
them but the Orsini bombs. Horrible. It happened on the
way to the opera. Oh, they must be a fine lot over there.”</p>

<p>“Oh, it doesn’t signify much, I should think. It has nothing
to do with the people, and the only effect will be that the
police will be doubled and there will be twice as much interference
with the press. He is on his guard. Yes, it must be
a perpetual strain, for he has to introduce new projects all
the time, to keep himself in power. But I respect him, all
the same. At all events, he can’t be a fool, with his traditions,
and I was very much impressed with the cheap bread affair.
There is no doubt he does a great deal for the people.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Herr Kistenmaker says so too.”</p>

<p>“Stephan? We were talking about it yesterday.”</p>

<p>“It looks bad for Frederick William of Prussia. Things
won’t last much longer as they are. They say already that
the prince will be made Regent in time.”</p>

<p>“It will be interesting to see what happens then. He has
already shown that he has liberal ideas and does not feel his
brother’s secret disgust for the Constitution. It is just the
chagrin that upsets him, poor man. What is the news from
Copenhagen?”</p>

<p>“Nothing new, Herr Consul. They simply won’t. The
Confederation has declared that a united government for Holstein
and Lauenburg is illegal—they won’t have it at any
price.”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is unheard-of, Wenzel. They dare the Bundestag to
put it into operation—and if it were a little more lively—oh,
these Danes!—Careful with that chapped place, Wenzel.—There’s
our direct-line Hamburg railway, too. That has cost
some diplomatic battles, and will cost more before they get the
concession from Copenhagen.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Herr Consul. The stupid thing is that the Altona-Kiel
Railway Company is against it—and, in fact, all Holstein
is. Dr. Överdieck, the Burgomaster, was saying so just
now. They are dreadfully afraid of Kiel prospering much.”</p>

<p>“Of course, Wenzel. A new connection between the North
Sea and the Baltic.—You’ll see, the Kiel-Altona line will
keep on intriguing. They are in a position to build a rival
railway: East Holstein, Neuminster, Neustadt—yes, that is
quite on the cards. But we must not let ourselves be bullied,
and we must have a direct route to Hamburg.”</p>

<p>“Herr Consul must take the matter up himself.”</p>

<p>“Certainly, so far as my powers go, and wherever I have
any influence. I am interested in the development of our
railways—it is a tradition with us from 1851 on. My Father
was a director of the Buchen line, which is probably the reason
why I was elected so young. I am only thirty-three years
old, and my services so far have been very inconsiderable.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Herr Consul! How can the Herr Consul say that after
his speech in the Assembly—?”</p>

<p>“Yes, that made an impression, and I’ve certainly shown
my good will, at least. I can only be grateful that my Father,
Grandfather, and great-Grandfather prepared the way for me,
and that I inherited so much of the respect and confidence
they received from the town; for without it I could not move
as I am now able to. For instance, after ’48 and the beginning
of this decade, what did my Father not do towards the
reform of our postal service? Think how he urged in the
Assembly the union of the Hamburg diligences with the postal
service; and how in 1850 he forced the Senate by continuous
pressure to join the German-Austrian Postal Union! If we
have cheap letter postage now, and stamps and book post,
and letter-boxes, and telegraphic connection with Hamburg
and Travemünde, he is not the last one to be grateful to.
Why, if he and a few other people had not kept at the Senate
continually, we should most likely still be behind the Danish
and the Thurn-and-Taxis postal service! So when I have an
opinion nowadays on these subjects, people listen to me.”</p>

<p>“The Herr Consul is speaking God’s truth. About the Hamburg
line, Doctor Överdieck was saying to me only three days
ago: ‘When we get where we can buy a suitable site for the
station in Hamburg, we will send Consul Buddenbrook to help
transact the business, for in such dealings he is better than
most lawyers.’ Those were his very words.”</p>

<p>“Well, that is very flattering to me, Wenzel.—Just put a
little more lather on my chin, will you? It wants a bit more
cleaning up.—Yes, the truth is, we mustn’t let the grass
grow under our feet. I am saying nothing against Överdieck,
but he is getting on. If I were Burgomaster I’d make things
move a little faster. I can’t tell you how pleased I am that
they are installing gas for the street-lighting, and the miserable
old oil lamps are disappearing—I admit I had a little
something to do with that change. Oh, how much there is to
do! Times are changing, Wenzel, and we have many responsibilities
toward the new age. When I think back to my boyhood—you
know better than I do what the town looked like
then: the streets without sidewalks, grass growing a foot high
between the paving-stones, and the houses with porticos and
benches sticking out into the streets—and our buildings from
the time of the Middle Ages spoilt with clumsy additions,
and all tumbling down because, while individuals had money
and nobody went hungry, the town had none at all and just
muddled along, as my brother-in-law calls it, without ever
thinking of repairs. That was a happy and comfortable generation,
when my grandfather’s crony, the good Jean Jacques
Hofstede, strolled about the town and translated improper
little French poems. They had to end, those good old times;
they have changed, and they will have to change still more.
Then the population was thirty-seven thousand: now it is
fifty, you know, and the whole character of the place is altering.
There is so much building, and the suburbs are spreading
out, and we are able to have good streets and restore the
old monuments out of our great period. Yet even all that is
merely superficial. The most important matter is still outstanding,
my dear Wenzel. I mean, of course, the <i>ceterum
censeo</i> of my dear Father: the customs union. We must join,
Wenzel; there should be no longer any question about it, and
you must all help me fight for it. As a business man, believe
me, I am better informed than the diplomats, and the fear that
we should lose independence and freedom of action is simply
laughable in this case. The Mecklenburg and Schleswig-Holstein
Inland would take us in, which is the more desirable
for the reason that we do not control the northern trade quite
to the extent that we once did.—That’s enough. Please give
me the towel, Wenzel,” concluded the Consul.</p>

<p>Then the market price of rye, which stood at fifty-five
thaler and showed disquieting signs of falling still further,
was talked about, and perhaps there was a mention of some
event or other in the town; and then Herr Wenzel vanished
by the basement route and emptied the lather out of his
shiny basin on to the pavement in the street. And the Consul
mounted the winding stair into the bedroom, and found Gerda
awake, and kissed her on the forehead. Then he dressed.</p>

<p>These little morning sessions with the lively barber formed
the introduction to busy days, full to running over with thinking,
talking, writing, reckoning, doing business, going about
in the town. Thanks to his travel, his interests, and his knowledge
of affairs, Thomas Buddenbrook’s mind was the least
provincial in the district; and he was certainly the first to
realize the limitations of his lot. The lively interest in
public affairs which the years of the Revolution had brought
in, was suffering throughout the whole country from a period
of prostration and arrest, and that field was too sterile to occupy
a vigorous talent; but Thomas Buddenbrook possessed
the spirit to take to himself that wise old saying that all human
achievement is of a merely symbolic value, and thus to
devote all that he had of capacity, enthusiasm, energy, and
strength of will to the service of the community as well as to
the service of his own name and firm. He stood in the front
rank of his small society and was seriously ambitious to give
his city greatness and power within her sphere—though he
had the intellect too, to smile at himself for the ambition
even while he cherished it.</p>

<p>He ate his breakfast, served by Anton, and went to the
office in Meng Street, where he remained about an hour, writing
two or three pressing letters and telegrams, giving this
or that instruction, imparting to the wheels of industry a small
push, and then leaving them to revolve under the cautious eye
of Herr Marcus.</p>

<p>He went to assemblies and committee meetings, visited the
Bourse, which was held under the Gothic arcades in the Market
square, inspected dockyards and warehouses, talked with the
captains of the ships he owned, and transacted much and various
business all day long until evening, interrupted only by
the hasty luncheon with his Mother and dinner with Gerda;
after which he took a half-hour’s rest on the sofa with his
cigarette and the newspaper. Customs, rates, construction,
railways, posts, almonry—all this as well as his own business
occupied him; and even in matters commonly left to professionals
he acquired insight and judgment, especially in finance,
where he early showed himself extremely gifted.</p>

<p>He was careful not to neglect the social side. True, he
was not always punctual, and usually appeared at the very
last minute, when the carriage waited below and his wife sat
in full toilette. “I’m sorry, Gerda,” he would say; “I was
detained”; and he would dash upstairs to don his evening
clothes. But when he arrived at a dinner, a ball, or an evening
company, he showed lively interest and ranked as a
charming <i>causeur</i>. And in entertaining he and his wife were
not behind the other rich houses. In kitchen and cellar everything
was “tip-top,” and he himself was considered a most
courteous and tactful host, whose toasts were wittier than
the common run. His quiet evenings he spent at home
with Gerda alone, smoking, listening to her music, or reading
with her some book of her selection.</p>

<p>Thus his labours enforced success, his consequence grew in
the town, and the firm had excellent years, despite the sums
drawn out to settle Christian and to pay Tony’s second dowry.
And yet there were troubles which had, at times, the power to
lame his courage for hours, weaken his elasticity, and depress
his mood.</p>

<p>There was Christian in Hamburg. His partner, Herr Burmeester,
had died quite suddenly of an apoplectic stroke, in
the spring of the year 1858. His heirs drew their money out
of the business, and the Consul strongly advised Christian
against trying to continue it with his own means, for he knew
how difficult it is to carry on a business already established
on definite lines if the working capital be suddenly diminished.
But Christian insisted upon the continuation of his independence.
He took over the assets and the liabilities of H. C. F.
Burmeester and Company, and trouble was to be looked for.</p>

<p>Then there was the Consul’s sister Clara in Riga. Her marriage
with Pastor Tiburtius had remained unblest with children—but
then, as Clara Buddenbrook she had never wanted
children, and probably had very little talent for motherhood.
Now her husband wrote that her health left much to be
desired. The severe headaches from which she had suffered
even as a girl were now recurring periodically, to an almost
unbearable extent.</p>

<p>That was disquieting. And even here at home there was
another source of worry—for, as yet, there was no certainty
whatever that the family name would live. Gerda treated the
subject with sovereign indifference which came very near to
being repugnance. Thomas concealed his anxiety. But
the old Frau Consul took the matter in hand and consulted
Grabow.</p>

<p>“Doctor—just between ourselves—something is bound to
happen <i>sometime</i>, isn’t it? A little mountain air at Kreuth,
a little seashore at Glucksberg or Travemünde—but they don’t
seem to work. What do you advise?” Dr. Grabow’s pleasant
old prescription: “a nourishing diet, a little pigeon, a slice of
French bread,” didn’t seem strong enough, either, to fit the
case. He ordered Pyrmont and Schlangenbad.</p>

<p>Those were three worries. And Tony? Poor Tony!</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">She</span> wrote: “... And when I say ‘croquettes,’ she doesn’t
understand me, because here they are called ‘meaties’; and
when she says ‘broccoli,’ how could any Christian know she
means cauliflower? When I say ‘baked potatoes,’ she screams
‘How?’ at me, until I remember to say ‘roast potatoes,’ which
is what they call them here. ‘How’ means ‘What did you
say?’ And she is the second one I’ve had—I sent away the
first one, named Katy, because she was so impertinent—or
at least, I thought she was. I’m getting to see now that I may
have been mistaken, for I’m never quite sure whether people
here mean to be rude or friendly. This one’s name is Babette.
She has a very pleasing exterior, with something
southern, the way of some of them have here; black hair
and eyes, and teeth that any one might envy. She is
willing, too, and I am teaching her how to make some of our
home dishes. Yesterday we had sorrel and currants, but I
wish I hadn’t, for Permaneder objected so much to the sorrel—he
picked the currants out with a fork—that he would not
speak to me the whole afternoon, but just growled; and I can
tell you, Mother, that life is not so easy.”</p>

<p>Alas, it was not only the sorrel and the “meaties” that were
embittering Tony’s life. Before the honeymoon was over she
had had a blow so unforeseen, so unexpected, so incomprehensible,
that it took away all her joy in life. She could not
get over it. And here it was.</p>

<p>Not until after the Permaneder couple had been some
weeks in Munich had Consul Buddenbrook liquidated the
sum fixed by his Father’s will as his sister’s second marriage
portion. That sum, translated into gulden, had at last safely
reached Herr Permaneder’s hands, and Herr Permaneder had
invested it securely and not unprofitably. But then, what he
had said, quite unblushingly and without embarrassment, to
his wife, was this: “Tonerl”—he called her “Tonerl”—“Tonerl,
that’s good enough for me. What do we want of
more? I been working my hide off all my days; now I’d like
to sit down and have a little peace and quiet, damned if I
wouldn’t. Let’s rent the parterre and the second floor, and
still we’ll have a good house, where we can sit and eat our
bit of pig’s meat without screwing ourselves up and putting
on so much lug. And in the evening I can go to the Hofbräu
house. I’m no swell—I don’t care about scraping money together.
I want my comfort. I quit to-morrow and go into
private life.”</p>

<p>“Permaneder!” she had cried; and for the first time she
had spoken his name with that peculiar throaty sound which
her voice always had when she uttered the name of Grünlich.</p>

<p>“Oh, shut up! Don’t take on!” was all he answered.
There had followed, thus early in their life together, a quarrel,
serious and violent enough to endanger the happiness of any
marriage. He came off victorious. Her passionate resistance
was shattered upon his urgent longing for “peace and
quiet.” It ended in Herr Permaneder’s withdrawing the capital
he had in the hop business, so that now Herr Noppe, in
his turn, could strike the “and Company” off his card. After
which Tony’s husband, like most of the friends whom he met
around the table in the Hofbräu House, to play cards and
drink his regular three litres of beer, limited his activities to
the raising of rents in his capacity of landlord, and to an undisturbed
cutting of coupons.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul was notified quite simply of this fact.
But Frau Permaneder’s distress was evident in the letters which
she wrote to her brother. Poor Tony! Her worst fears
were more than realized. She had always known that Herr
Permaneder possessed none of that “resourcefulness” of which
her first husband had had so much; but that he would so entirely
confound the expectations she had expressed to Mamsell
Jungmann on the eve of her betrothal—that he would so completely
fail to recognize the duties he had taken upon himself
when he married a Buddenbrook—that she had never dreamed.</p>

<p>But these feelings must be overcome; and her family at
home saw from her letters how she resigned herself. She
lived on rather monotonously with her husband and Erica,
who went to school; she attended to her housekeeping, kept up
friendly relations with the people who rented the parterre and
the first storey and with the Niederpaur family in Marienplatz;
and she wrote now and then of going to the theatre with her
friend Eva. Herr Permaneder did not care for the theatre.
And it came out that he had grown to more than forty years
of age in his beloved Munich without ever having seen the inside
of the Pinakothek.</p>

<p>Time passed. But Tony could feel no longer any true
happiness in her new life, since the day when Herr Permaneder
received her dowry and settled himself down to enjoy his
ease. Hope was no more. She would never be able to write
home to announce new ventures and new successes. Just as
life was now—free from cares, it was true, but so limited, so
lamentably “unrefined,”—just so it would remain until the
end. It weighed upon her. It was plain from her letters
that this very lowness of tone was making it harder for her
to adapt herself to the south-German surroundings. In small
matters, of course, things grew easier. She learned to make
herself understood by the servants and errand-boys, to say
“meaties” instead of “croquettes,” and to set no more fruit
soup before her husband after the one he had called a “sickening
mess.” But, in general, she remained a stranger in her
new home; and she never ceased to taste the bitterness of the
knowledge that to be a born Buddenbrook was not to enjoy any
particular prestige in her adopted home. She once related
in a letter the story of how she met in the street a mason’s apprentice,
carrying a mug of beer in one hand and holding a
large white radish by its tail in the other; who, waving his
beer, said jovially: “Neighbour, can ye tell us the time?”
She made a joke of it, in the telling; yet even so, a strong
undercurrent of irritation betrayed itself. You might be
quite certain that she threw back her head and vouchsafed to
the poor man neither answer nor glance in his direction. But
it was not alone this lack of formality and absence of distinctions
that made her feel strange and unsympathetic. She
did not live deeply, it is true, into the life or affairs of her
new home; but she breathed the Munich air, the air of a great
city, full of artists and citizens who habitually did nothing:
an air with something about it a little demoralizing, which
she sometimes found it hard to take good-humouredly.</p>

<p>The days passed. And then it seemed that there was after
all a joy in store—in fact, the very one which was longed
for in vain in Broad Street and Meng Street. For not long
after the New Year of 1859 Tony felt certain that she was
again to become a mother.</p>

<p>The joy of it trembled in her letters, which were full of the
old childish gaiety and sense of importance. The Frau Consul,
who, with the exception of the summer holiday, confined
her journeyings more and more to the Baltic coast, lamented
that she could not be with her daughter at this time.
Tom and Gerda made plans to go to the christening, and
Tony’s head was full of giving them an elegant reception.
Alas, poor Tony! The visit which took place was sad indeed,
and the christening—Tony had cherished visions of a ravishing
little feast, with flowers, sweetmeats, and chocolate—never
took place at all. The child, a little girl, only entered into
life for a tiny quarter of an hour; then, though the doctor did
his best to set the pathetic little mechanism going, it faded out
of being.</p>

<p>Consul Buddenbrook and his wife arrived in Munich to
find Tony herself not out of danger. She was far more ill
than before, and a nervous weakness from which she had already
suffered prevented her from taking any nourishment at
all for several days. Then she began to eat, and on their departure,
the Buddenbrooks felt reassured as far as her health
was concerned. But in other ways there was much reason for
anxiety; for it had been all too plain, especially to the Consul’s
observant eye, that not even their common loss would
suffice to bring husband and wife together again.</p>

<p>There was nothing against Herr Permaneder’s good heart.
He was truly shaken by the death of the child; big tears rolled
down out of his bulging eyes upon his puffy cheeks and on
into his frizzled beard. Many times he sighed deeply and
gave vent to his favourite expression. But, after all, Tony
felt that his “peace and quiet” had not suffered any long interruption.
After a few evenings, he sought the Hofbräu
House for consolation, and was soon, as he always said, “muddling
along” again in his old, good-natured, comfortable,
grumbling way, with the easy fatalism natural to him.</p>

<p>But from now on Tony’s letters never lost their hopeless,
even complaining tone. “Oh, Mother,” she wrote, “why do I
have to bear everything like this? First Grünlich and the
bankruptcy, and then Permaneder going out of business—and
then the baby! How have I deserved all these misfortunes?”</p>

<p>When the Consul read these outpourings, he could never
quite forego a little smile: for, nothwithstanding all the real
pain they showed, he heard an undertone of almost comic
pride, and he knew that Tony Buddenbrook, as Madame
Grünlich or as Madame Permaneder, was and would remain
a child. She bore all her mature experiences almost with a
child’s unbelief in their reality, yet with a child’s seriousness,
a child’s self-importance, and, above all, with a child’s power
to throw them off at will.</p>

<p>She could not understand how she had deserved her misfortunes;
for even while she mocked at her mother’s piety,
she herself was so full of it that she fervently believed in
justice and righteousness on this earth.</p>

<p>Poor Tony! The death of her second child was neither
the last nor the hardest blow that fell upon her. As the year
1859 drew to a close, something frightful indeed happened.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">It</span> was a day toward the end of November—a cold autumn day
with a hazy sky. It looked almost as if there would be snow,
and a mist was rising, pierced through every now and then
by the sun. It was one of those days, common in a seaport
town, when a sharp north-east wind whistled round the massive
church corners and influenzas were to be had cheap.</p>

<p>Consul Thomas Buddenbrook entered the breakfast-room
toward midday, to find his Mother, with her spectacles on her
nose, bent over a paper on the table.</p>

<p>“Tom,” she said; and she looked at him, holding the paper
with both hands, as if she hesitated to show it to him. “Don’t
be startled. But it is not very good news. I don’t understand— It
is from Berlin. Something must have happened.”</p>

<p>“Give it to me, please,” he said shortly. He lost colour,
and the muscles stood out on his temples as he clenched his
teeth. His gesture as he stretched out his hand was so full of
decision that it was as if he said aloud: “Just tell me quickly.
Don’t prepare me for it!”</p>

<p>He read the lines still standing; one of his light eyebrows
went up, and he drew the long ends of his moustache through
his fingers. It was a telegram, and it said: “Don’t be
frightened. Am coming at once with Erica. All is over.
Your unhappy Antonie.”</p>

<p>“‘At once ... at once,’” he said, with irritation, looking
at the Frau Consul and giving his head a quick shake. “What
does she mean by ‘at once’?”</p>

<p>“That is just a way of putting it, Tom; it doesn’t mean
anything particular. She means by the next train, or something
like that.”</p>

<p>“And from Berlin! What is she doing in Berlin? How
did she get to Berlin?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know, Tom; I don’t understand it. The dispatch
only came ten minutes ago. But something must have happened,
and we must just wait to see what it is. God in his
mercy will turn it all to good. Sit down, my son, and eat
your luncheon.”</p>

<p>He took his chair, and mechanically he poured out a glass
of porter.</p>

<p>“‘All is over,’” he repeated. And then “‘Antonie.’ How
childish!”</p>

<p>He ate and drank in silence.</p>

<p>After a while the Frau Consul ventured to say: “It must be
something about Permaneder, don’t you think, Tom?”</p>

<p>He shrugged his shoulders without looking up.</p>

<p>As he went away he said, with his hand on the doorknob,
“Well, we must wait and see. As she is not likely to burst
into the house in the middle of the night, she will probably
reach here sometime to-morrow. You will let me know,
won’t you?”</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>The Frau Consul waited from hour to hour. She had
slept very badly, and in the night she rang for Ida Jungmann,
who now slept in the back room of the entresol. She
had Ida make her some <i>eau sucrée</i>; and she sat up in bed for
a long time and embroidered. And now the forenoon passed
in nervous expectancy. When the Consul came to second
breakfast, he said that Tony could not arrive before the
three-thirty-three train from Buchen. At that hour the Frau
Consul seated herself in the landscape-room and tried to read,
out of a book with a black leather cover decorated with a
gold palm-leaf.</p>

<p>It was a day like its predecessor: cold, mist, wind. The
stove crackled away behind its wrought-iron screen. The old
lady trembled and looked out of the window whenever she
heard a wagon. At four o’clock, when she had stopped watching
and almost stopped thinking about her daughter, there was
a stir below in the house. She hastily turned toward the
window and wiped away the damp with her handkerchief.
Yes, a carriage had stopped below, and some one was coming
up the steps.</p>

<p>She grasped the arms of her chair with both hands to rise.
But then she thought better of it and sank back. She only
turned her head as her daughter entered, and her face wore
an almost defensive expression. Tony burst impetuously into
the room: Erica remained outside at the glass door, with
her hand in Ida Jungmann’s.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder wore a fur wrap and a large felt hat with
a veil. She looked very pale and ailing, and her upper lip
trembled as it used to when the little Tony was about to weep.
Her eyes were red. She raised her arms and let them drop,
and then she fell on her knees at her Mother’s side, burying her
face in the folds of her gown and sobbing bitterly. It was
as though she had rushed straight hither from Munich all in
one breath, and now lay there, having gained the goal of her
headlong flight, exhausted but safe. The Frau Consul sat a
moment quite still.</p>

<p>“Tony!” she said then, with gentle remonstrance. She
drew the long hatpins out of Frau Permaneder’s hat and laid
it on the window-seat; then she stroked gently and soothingly
her daughter’s thick ash-blonde hair.</p>

<p>“What is it, my child? What has happened?”</p>

<p>But she saw that patience was her only weapon; for it was
long before her question drew out any reply.</p>

<p>“Mother!” uttered Frau Permaneder. “Mamma!” But
that was all.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul looked toward the glass door and, still
embracing her daughter, stretched out her hand to her grandchild,
who stood there shyly with her finger to her mouth.</p>

<p>“Come, child; come here and say how do you do. You
have grown so big, and you look so strong and well, for which
God be thanked. How old are you now, Erica?”</p>

<p>“Thirteen, Grandmama.”</p>

<p>“Good gracious! A young lady!” She kissed the little
maiden over Tony’s head and told her: “Go up with Ida
now—we shall soon have dinner. Just now Mamma and I
want to talk.”</p>

<p>They were alone.</p>

<p>“Now, my dear Tony? Can you not stop crying? When
God sends us a heavy trial, we must bear it with composure.
‘Take your cross upon you,’ we are told. Would you like to
go up first and rest a little and refresh yourself, and then
come down to me again? Our good Jungmann has your room
ready. Thanks for your telegram—of course, it shocked us a
good deal—”</p>

<p>She stopped. For Tony’s voice came, all trembling and
smothered, out of the folds of her gown: “He is a wicked
man—a wicked man! Oh, he is—”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder seemed not able to get away from this
dreadful phrase. It possessed her altogether. She buried her
face deeper and deeper in the Frau Consul’s lap and clenched
her fist beside the Frau Consul’s chair.</p>

<p>“Do you mean your husband, my child?” asked the old
lady, after a pause. “It ought not to be possible for me to
have such a thought in my mind, I know; but you leave me
nothing else to think, Tony. Has Herr Permaneder done you
an injury? Are you making a complaint of him?”</p>

<p>“Babette” Frau Permaneder brought out. “Babette—”</p>

<p>“Babette?” repeated the Frau Consul, inquiringly. Then
she leaned back in her chair, and her pale eyes wandered
toward the window. She understood now. There was a
pause, broken by Tony’s gradually decreasing sobs.</p>

<p>“Tony,” said the Frau Consul after a little space, “I see
now that there has been an injury done you—that you have
cause to complain. But was it necessary to give the sense of
injury such violent expression? Was it necessary to travel
here from Munich, with Erica, and to make it appear—for
other people will not be so sensible as we are—that you have
left him permanently; that you will not go back to him?”</p>

<p>“But I won’t go back to him—never!” cried Frau Permaneder,
and she lifted up her head with a jerk and looked at
her Mother wildly with tear-stained eyes, and then buried her
face again. The Frau Consul affected not to have heard.</p>

<p>“But now,” she went on, in a louder key, slowly nodding
her head from one side to the other, “now that you are here,
I am glad you are. For you can unburden your heart, and
tell me everything, and then we shall see how we can put
things right, by taking thought, and by mutual forbearance
and affection.”</p>

<p>“Never,” Tony said again. “Never!” And then she told
her story. It was not all intelligible, for she spoke into the
folds of her Mother’s stuff gown, and broke into her own narrative
with explosions of passionate anger. But what had happened
was somewhat as follows:</p>

<p>On the night of the twenty-fourth of the month, Madame
Permaneder had gone to sleep very late, having been disturbed
during the day by the nervous digestive trouble to which
she was subject. She had been awakened about midnight, out
of a light slumber, by a confused and continuous noise outside
on the landing—a half-suppressed, mysterious noise, in
which one distinguished the creaking of the stairs, a sort of
giggling cough, smothered, protesting words, and, mixed with
these, the most singular snarling sounds. But there was no
doubt whence they proceeded. Frau Permaneder had hardly,
with her sleepy senses, taken them in before she interpreted
them as well, in such a way that she felt the blood leave her
cheeks and rush to her heart, which contracted and then went
on beating with heavy, oppressed pulsations. For a long,
dreadful minute she lay among the pillows as if stunned, as
if paralysed. Then, as the shameless disturbance did not
stop, she had with trembling hands kindled a light, had left
her bed, thrilling with horror, repulsion, and despair, had
opened the door and hurried out on to the landing in her
slippers, the light in her hand—to the top of the “ladder”
that went straight up from the house door to the first storey.
And there, on the upper steps, in all its actuality, was indeed
the very scene she had pictured in her mind’s eye as she
listened to the compromising noises. It was an unseemly and
indecent scuffle, a sort of wrestling match between Babette
the cook and Herr Permaneder. The girl must have been
busied late about the house, for she had her bunch of keys and
her candle in her hand as she swayed back and forth in the
effort to fend her master off. He, with his hat on the back of
his head, held her round the body and kept making essays,
now and then successfully, to press his face, with its great
walrus moustache, against hers. As Antonie appeared, Babette
exclaimed something that sounded like “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph!”—and
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph!” echoed Herr Permaneder
likewise, as he let go. Almost in the same second the
girl vanished, and there was Herr Permaneder left standing
before his wife, with drooping head, drooping arms, drooping
moustaches too; and all he could get out was some idiotic
remark like “Holy Cross, what a mess!” When he ventured
to lift his eyes, she was no longer there. She was in the
bed-chamber, half-sitting, half-lying on the bed, repeating
over and over again with frantic sobbing, “Shame, shame!”
He leaned rather flabbily in the doorway and jerked his
shoulder in her direction—had he been closer, the gesture
would have been a nudge in the ribs. “Hey, Tonerl—don’t be
a fool, you know. Say—you know Franz, the Ramsau Franz,
he had his name-day to-day, and we’re all half-seas over.”
Strong alcoholic fumes pervaded the room as he spoke; and
they brought Frau Permaneder’s excitement to a climax. She
sobbed no more, she was no longer weak and faint. Carried
away by frenzy, incapable of measuring her words, she poured
out her disgust, her abhorrence, her complete and utter contempt
and loathing of him and all his ways. Herr Permaneder
did not take it meekly. His head was hot; for he had
treated his friend Franz not only to many beers, but to
“champagne wine” as well. He answered and answered
wildly—the quarrel reached a height far greater than the
one that had signalized Herr Permaneder’s retirement into
private life, and it ended in Frau Antonie gathering her
clothes together and withdrawing into the living-room for
the night. And at the end he had flung at her a word—a word
which she would not repeat—a word that should never pass
her lips—a word....</p>

<p>This was the major content of the confession which Frau
Permaneder had sobbed into the folds of her mother’s gown.
But the “word,” the word that in that fearful night had sunk
into her very depths—no, she would not repeat it; no, she
would not, she asseverated,—although her mother had not in
the least pressed her to do so, but only nodded her head,
slowly, almost imperceptibly, as she looked down on Tony’s
lovely ash-blond hair.</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” she said; “this is very sad, Tony. And I understand
it all, my dear little one, because I am not only
your Mamma, but I am a woman like you as well. I see
now how fully your grief is justified, and how completely
your husband, in a moment of weakness, forgot what he owed
to you and—”</p>

<p>“In a moment—?” cried Tony. She sprang up. She made
two steps backward and feverishly dried her eyes. “A moment,
Mamma! He <i>forgot</i> what he owed to me and to our
name? He never <i>knew</i> it, from the very beginning! A man
that quietly sits down with his wife’s dowry—a man without
ambition or energy or will-power! A man that has some
kind of thick soup made out of hops in his veins instead of
blood—and I verily believe he has! And to let himself down
to such common doings as this with Babette—and when I reproached
him with his good-for-nothingness, to answer with a
word that—a word—”</p>

<p>And, arrived once more at the word, the word she would not
repeat, quite suddenly she took a step forward and said, in a
completely altered, a quieter, milder, interested tone:
“How perfectly sweet! Where did you get that, Mamma?”
She motioned with her chin toward a little receptacle, a
charming basket-work stand woven out of reeds and decorated
with ribbon bows, in which the Frau Consul kept her
fancy-work.</p>

<p>“I bought it, some time ago,” answered the old lady. “I
needed it.”</p>

<p>“Very smart,” Tony said, looking at it with her head on
one side. The Frau Consul looked at it too, but without seeing
it, for she was in deep thought.</p>

<p>“Now, my dear daughter,” she said at last, putting out her
hand again, “however things are, you are here, and welcome a
hundred times to your old home. We can talk everything
over when we are calmer. Take your things off in your room
and make yourself comfortable. Ida!” she called into the
dining-room, lifting her voice, “lay a place for Madame Permaneder,
and one for Erica, my dear.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER X</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Tony</span> returned to her bed-chamber after dinner. During the
meal her Mother had told her that Thomas was aware of her
expected arrival; and she did not seem particularly anxious
to meet him.</p>

<p>The Consul came at six o’clock. He went into the
landscape-room and had a long talk with his Mother.</p>

<p>“How is she?” he asked. “How does she seem?”</p>

<p>“Oh, Tom, I am afraid she is very determined. She is
terribly wrought up. And this word—if I only knew what
it was he said—”</p>

<p>“I will go up and see her.”</p>

<p>“Yes, do, Tom. But knock softly, so as not to startle her,
and be very calm, will you? Her nerves are upset. That is
the trouble she has with her digestion—she has eaten nothing.
Do talk quietly with her.”</p>

<p>He went up quickly, skipping a step in his usual way. He
was thinking, and twisting the ends of his moustache, but
as he knocked his face cleared—he was resolved to handle the
situation as long as possible with humour.</p>

<p>A suffering voice said “Come in,” and he opened the door,
to find Frau Permaneder lying on the bed fully dressed. The
bed curtains were flung back, the down quilt was underneath
her back, and a medicine bottle stood on the night-table. She
turned round a little and propped her head on her hand, looking
at him with her pouting smile. He made a deep bow
and spread out his hands in a solemn gesture.</p>

<p>“Well, dear lady! To what are we indebted for the honour
of a visit from this personage from the royal city of—?”</p>

<p>“Oh, give me a kiss, Tom,” she said, sat up to offer him her
cheek, and then sank back again. “Well, how are you, my
dear boy? Quite unchanged, I see, since I saw you in
Munich.”</p>

<p>“You can’t tell much about it with the blinds down, my
dear. And you ought not to steal my thunder like that, either.
It is more suitable for me to say—” he held her hand in his,
and at the same time drew up a chair beside the bed—“as I
so often have, that you and Tilda—”</p>

<p>“Oh, for shame, Tom!—How is Tilda?”</p>

<p>“Well, of course. Madame Krauseminz sees she doesn’t
starve. Which doesn’t prevent her eating for the week ahead
when she comes here on Thursday.”</p>

<p>She laughed very heartily—as she had not for a long time
back, in fact. Then she broke off with a sigh, and asked “And
how is business?”</p>

<p>“Oh, we get on. Mustn’t complain.”</p>

<p>“Thank goodness, here everything is as it should be. Oh,
Tom, I don’t feel much like chatting pleasantly about trifles!”</p>

<p>“Pity. One should preserve one’s sense of humour, <i>quand
même</i>.”</p>

<p>“All that is at an end, Tom.—You know all?”</p>

<p>“‘You know all’!” he repeated. He dropped her hand and
pushed back his chair. “Goodness gracious, how that sounds!
‘All’! What-all lies in that ‘all’? ‘My love and grief I gave
thee,’ eh? No, listen!”</p>

<p>She was silent. She swept him with an astonished and
deeply offended glance.</p>

<p>“Yes, I expected that look,” he said, “for without that look
you would not be here. But, dear Tony, let me take the thing
as much too lightly as you take it too seriously. You will see
we shall complement each other very nicely—”</p>

<p>“Too seriously, Thomas? <i>I</i> take it too seriously?”</p>

<p>“Yes.—For heaven’s sake, don’t let’s make a tragedy of it!
Let us take it in a lower key, not with ‘all is at an end’ and
‘your unhappy Antonie.’ Don’t misunderstand me, Tony.
You well know that no one can be gladder than I that you have
come. I have long wished you would come to us on a visit
by yourself, without your husband, so that we could be <i>en
famille</i> together once more. But to come now, like this—my
dear child, I beg your pardon, but it was—foolish. Yes—let
me finish! Permaneder has certainly behaved very badly, as
I will give him to understand pretty clearly—don’t be afraid
of that—”</p>

<p>“As to how he has behaved himself, Thomas,” she interrupted
him, raising herself up to lay a hand upon her breast,
“as far as that goes, I have already given him to understand
that—and not only ‘given him to understand,’ I can tell you!
I am convinced that further discussion with that man is entirely
out of place.” And she let herself fall back again and
looked sternly and fixedly at the ceiling.</p>

<p>He bowed, as if under the weight of her words, and kept
on looking down at his knee and smiling.</p>

<p>“Well, then, I won’t send him a stiff letter. It is just as
you say. In the end it is after all your affair, and it is quite
enough if you put him in his place—it is your duty as his
wife. After all, there are some extenuating circumstances.
There was a birthday celebration, and he came home a little
bit exalted, so to speak, and was guilty of a false step, an
unseemly blunder—”</p>

<p>“Thomas,” said she, “I do not understand you. I do not
understand your tone. You—a man with your principles!
But you did not see him. You did not see how drunk he
looked—”</p>

<p>“He looked ridiculous enough, I’m sure. But that is it,
Tony. You will not see how comic it was—but probably that
is the fault of your bad digestion. You caught your husband
in a moment of weakness, and you have seen him make himself
look ridiculous. But that ought not to outrage you to
such an extent. It ought to amuse you a little, perhaps, but
bring you closer together as human beings. I will say that I
don’t mean you could have just let it pass with a laugh and
said nothing about it—not at all. You left home; that was a
demonstration of a rather extreme kind, perhaps—a bit too
severe—but, after all, he deserved it. I imagine he is feeling
pretty down in the mouth. I only mean that you must get
to take the thing differently—not so insulted—a little more
politic point of view. We are just between ourselves. Let
me tell you something, Tony. In any marriage, the important
thing is, on which side the moral ascendency lies. Understand?
Your husband has laid himself open, there is no
doubt of that. He compromised himself and made a laughable
spectacle—laughable, precisely because what he did was
actually so harmless, so impossible to take seriously. But,
after all, his dignity is impaired—and the moral advantage
has passed over to you. If you know how to use it wisely,
your happiness is assured. If you go back, say in a couple
of weeks—certainly I must insist on keeping you for ourselves
as long as that—if you go back to Munich in a couple of weeks,
you will see—”</p>

<p>“I will not go back to Munich, Thomas.”</p>

<p>“I beg your pardon?” he asked, putting his hand to his
ear and screwing up his face as he bent forward.</p>

<p>She was lying on her back with her head sunk in the pillow,
so that her chin stood out with an effect of severity. “Never,”
she said. And she gave a long, audible outward breath and
cleared her throat, also at length and deliberately. It was
like a dry cough, which had of late become almost a habit
with her, and had probably to do with her digestive trouble.
There followed a pause.</p>

<p>“Tony,” he said suddenly, getting up and slapping his
hand on the arm of his chair, “you aren’t going to make a
scandal!”</p>

<p>She gave a side-glance and saw him all pale, with the
muscles standing out on his temples. Her position was no
longer tenable. She bestirred herself and, to hide the fear
she really felt of him, grew angry in her turn. She sat up
quickly and put her feet to the floor. With glowing cheeks
and a frowning brow, making hasty motions of the head and
hands, she began: “Scandal, Thomas! You want to tell me
not to make a scandal, when I have been insulted, and people
spit in my face? Is that worthy of a brother, you will permit
me to ask? Circumspection, tact—they are very well in their
place. But there are limits, Tom—I know just as much of
life as you do, and I tell you there is a point where the care
for appearances leaves off, and cowardice begins! I am
astonished that such a stupid goose as I am have to tell you
this—yes, I am a stupid goose, and I should not be surprised
if Permaneder never loved me at all, for I am an ugly old
woman, very likely, and Babette is certainly prettier than I
am! But did that give him a right to forget the respect he
owed to my family, and my upbringing, and all my feelings?
You did not see the way he forgot himself, Tom; and since you
did not see it, you cannot understand, for I can never tell you
how disgusting he was. You did not hear the word that he
called after me, your sister, when I took my things and went
out of the room, to sleep on the sofa in the living-room.
But <i>I</i> heard it, and it was a word that—a word— Oh, it was
that word, let me tell you, Thomas, that caused me, to spend
the whole night packing my trunk, to wake Erica early in the
morning, and to leave the place, rather than to remain in the
neighbourhood of a man who could utter such words. And
to such a man, as I said before, I will never, never return,
not so long as I have any self-respect, or care in the least what
becomes of me in my life on this earth.”</p>

<p>“And will you now have the goodness, to tell me what this
cursed word was? Yes or no?”</p>

<p>“Never, Thomas! Never would I permit that word to cross
my lips. I know too well what I owe to you and to myself
within these walls.”</p>

<p>“Then it’s no use talking with you!”</p>

<p>“That may easily be. I am sure I do not want to discuss
it any further.”</p>

<p>“What do you expect to do? Get a divorce?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom; such is my firm determination. I feel that I
owe it to myself, my child, and my family.”</p>

<p>“That is all nonsense, of course,” he said in a dispassionate
tone. He turned on his heel and moved away, as if his words
had settled the matter. “It takes two to make a divorce, my
child. Do you think Permaneder will just say yes and thank
you kindly? The idea is absurd.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you can leave that to me,” she said, quite undismayed.
“You mean he will refuse on account of the seventeen thousand
marks current. But Grünlich wasn’t willing, either, and
they made him. There are ways and means, I’m sure. I’ll
go to Dr. Gieseke. He is Christian’s friend, and he will help
me. Oh, yes, of course, I know it was not the same thing
then. It was ‘incapacity of the husband to provide for his
family.’ You see, I know my way about in these affairs.
Dear me, you act as if this were the first time in my life that
I got a divorce! But even so, Tom. Perhaps there is nothing
that applies to this case. Perhaps it is impossible—you may
be right. But it is all the same; my resolve is fixed. Let
him keep the money. There are higher things in life. He
will never see me again, either way.”</p>

<p>She coughed again. She had left the bed and seated herself
in an easy-chair, resting one elbow on its arm. Her chin
was so deeply buried in her hand that her four bent fingers
clutched her under lip. She sat with her body turned to the
right, staring with red, excited eyes out of the window.</p>

<p>The Consul walked up and down, sighed, shook his head,
shrugged his shoulders. He paused in front of her, fairly
wringing his hands.</p>

<p>“You are a child, Tony, a child,” said he in a discouraged,
almost pleading tone. “Every word you have spoken is the
most utter childish nonsense. Will you make an effort, now,
if I beg you, to think about the thing for just one minute like
a grown woman? Don’t you see that you are acting as if
something very serious and dreadful had happened to you—as
if your husband had cruelly betrayed you and heaped insults
on you before all the world? Do try to realize that
nothing of the sort has happened! Not a single soul in the
world knows anything about that silly affair that happened
at the top of your staircase in Kaufinger Street. Your dignity,
and ours, will suffer no slightest diminution if you go calmly
and composedly back to Permaneder—of course, with your
nose in the air! But, on the other hand, if you don’t go
back, if you give this nonsense so much importance as to
make a scandal out of it, then you will be wounding our
dignity indeed.”</p>

<p>She jerked her chin out of her hand and stared him in the
face.</p>

<p>“That’s enough, Thomas Buddenbrook. Be quiet now; it’s
my turn. Listen. So you think there is no shame and no
scandal so long as people don’t get to hear it? Ah, no! The
shame that gnaws at us secretly and eats away our self-respect—that
is far, far worse. Are we Buddenbrooks the sort of
people to be satisfied if everything looks ‘tip-top,’ as you say
here, on the outside, no matter how much mortification we
have to choke down, inside our four walls? I cannot help
feeling astonished at you, Tom. Think of our Father and how
he would act to-day—and then judge as he would! No, no!
Clean and open dealings must be the rule. Why, you can
open your books any day, for all the world to see, and say,
‘Here they are, look at them.’ We should all of us be just
the same. I know how God has made me. I am not afraid.
Let Julchen Möllendorpf pass me in the street and not speak,
if she wants to. Let Pfiffi Buddenbrook sit here on Thursday
afternoons and shake all over with spite, and say, ‘Well, that
is the second time! But, <i>of course</i>, both times the men were
to blame!’ I feel so far above all that now, Thomas—farther
than I can tell you! I know I have done what I thought
was right. But if I am to be so afraid of Julchen Möllendorpf
and Pfiffi Buddenbrook as to swallow down all sorts of insults
and let myself be cursed out in a drunken dialect that isn’t
even grammar—to stop with a man in a town where I have to
get used to that kind of language and the kind of scenes I saw
that night at the top of the stairs—where I have to forget my
origin and my upbringing and everything that I am, and learn
to disown it altogether in order to act as if I were satisfied
and happy—<i>that</i> is what <i>I</i> call undignified—<i>that</i> is what <i>I</i>
call scandalous, I tell you!”</p>

<p>She broke off, buried her chin once more in her hand, and
stared out of the window. He stood before her, his weight
on one leg, his hands in his trousers pockets. His eyes rested
on her unseeing, for he was in deep thought, and slowly
moving his head from side to side.</p>

<p>“Tony,” he said. “You’re telling the truth. I knew it
all along; but you betrayed yourself just now. It is not
the man at all. It is the place. It isn’t this other idiotic
business—it is the whole thing all together. You couldn’t
get used to it. Tell the truth.”</p>

<p>“Thomas,” she cried, “it is the truth!” She sprang up as
she spoke, and pointed straight into his face with her outstretched
hand. Her own face was red. She stood there in
a warlike pose, one hand grasping the chair, gesticulating with
the other, and made a long, agitated, passionate speech that
welled up in a resistless tide. The Consul stared at her
amazed. Scarcely would she pause to draw breath, when
new words would come gushing and bubbling forth. Yes,
she found words for everything; she gave full expression to
all the accumulated disgust of her Munich years. Unassorted,
confused, she poured it all out, one thing after
another; she kept nothing back. It was like the bursting of
a dam—an assertion of desperate integrity; something elemental,
a force of nature, that brooked no restraint.</p>

<p>“It is the truth!” she cried. “Say it again, Thomas! Oh,
I can tell you plainly, I am no stupid goose any longer; I
know what I have to expect. I don’t faint away at my time of
life, to hear that dirty work goes on now and then. I’ve
known people like Teary Trieschke, and I was married to
Bendix Grünlich, and I know the dissipated creatures there
are here in this town. I am no country innocent, I tell you;
and the affair with Babette wouldn’t have made me go off the
handle like that, just by itself. No, Thomas, the thing was
that it filled the cup to overflowing—and that didn’t take
much, for it was full already, and had been for a long time—a
long time. It would have taken very little to make it
run over. And then this happened! The knowledge that
I could not depend on Permaneder even in that way—that put
the top on everything. It knocked the bottom out of the
cask. It brought to a head all at once my intention to get
away from Munich, that had been slowly growing in my mind
a long time before that, Tom; for I cannot live down there—I
swear it before God and all His heavenly hosts! How
wretched I have been, Thomas, you can never know. When
you were there on a visit, I concealed everything, for I am a
tactful woman and do not burden others with my complainings,
nor wear my heart on my sleeve on a week-day. I have
always been rather reserved. But I have suffered, Tom,
suffered with my entire being—with my whole personality, so
to speak. Like a plant, a flower that has been transplanted
into a foreign soil—if I may make such a comparison. You
will probably find it a most unsuitable one, for I am really
an ugly old woman—but I could not be planted in a more
foreign soil than that, and I would just as lief go and live in
Turkey! Oh, we should never be transplanted, we northern
folk! We should stick to the shore of our own bay; we
can only really thrive upon our native soil! You all used
to laugh at my taste for the nobility. Yes, in these years I
have often thought of what somebody said to me once, in
times gone by. A very clever man. ‘Your sympathies are
with the nobility,’ he said. ‘Shall I tell you why? Because
you yourself belong to the nobility. Your father is a great
gentleman, and you are a princess. A gulf lies between you
and the rest of us who do not belong to the governing classes.’
Yes, Tom. We feel like the nobility, and we realize the difference;
we should never try to live where we are not known,
where no one understands our worth, for we shall have nothing
but chagrin, and be laughed at for our arrogance. Yes, they
all found me ridiculously arrogant. They did not say so,
but I felt it every minute, and that made me suffer, too. Do
you think I feel arrogant, Tom—in a place where they eat
cake with a knife, and the very princes speak bad grammar,
and if a gentleman picks up a lady’s fan it is supposed to be
a love-affair. Get used to it? To people without dignity,
morals, energy, ambition, self-respect, or good manners, lazy
and frivolous, stupid and shallow at the same time?—no,
never, never, as long as I am a Buddenbrook and your sister!
Eva Ewers managed it—but Eva is not a Buddenbrook, and she
has a husband that amounts to something. It was different
with me. You think back, Tom, from the very beginning:
I come from a home where people work and get things accomplished
and have a purpose in life, and I go down there
to Permaneder—and he sits himself down with my dowry— Oh,
that was genuine enough, that was characteristic—but
it was the only good thing there was about it! And then?
I was going to have a baby; that would have made everything
up to me. And what happens? It dies. I don’t blame
Permaneder for that, of course; I don’t mean that. God forbid.
He did everything he could—and he didn’t go to the
café for several days. But, after all, it belonged to the same
thing. It made me no happier, as you can well believe.
But I didn’t give in, and I didn’t grumble. I was alone, and
misunderstood, and pointed at for being arrogant; but I said
to myself: ‘You yielded him your consent for life. He is
lumpy and lazy, and he caused you a cruel disappointment.
But his heart is pure, and he means well.’ And then I had to
bear the sight of him in that last unspeakable minute. And I
said to myself: ‘He understands you no better and respects
you no more and no less than the others do, and he calls you
names that one of our workmen up here wouldn’t throw at a
dog!’ I knew then that nothing bound me to him any more,
and that it was an indignity for me to stay. When I was driving
from the station this afternoon, I passed Nielsen the
porter, and he took off his hat and made me a deep bow, and
I bowed back to him—not arrogantly, not a bit—I waved
my hand, just the way Father used to. And here I am.
You can do what you like: you can harness up all your work-horses—but
you can never drag me back to Munich again.
And to-morrow I go to Gieseke!”</p>

<p>Thus she spoke; and, finishing, sank back exhausted in
her chair and stared again out of the window.</p>

<p>Tom was alarmed, shaken, stupefied. He stood before her
and found no words. He raised his arms up shoulder-high,
drawing a long breath. Then he let them fall against his
thighs.</p>

<p>“Well, that’s an end of it,” he said. His voice was calm,
and he turned and went toward the door.</p>

<p>Her face wore now the same expression, the same half-pouting,
half-injured smile, as when he entered.</p>

<p>“Tom?” she said, with a rising inflection. “Are you vexed
with me?”</p>

<p>He held the oval doorknob in one hand and made a gesture
of weary protest with the other. “Oh, no. Not at all.”</p>

<p>She put out her hand and tipped her head on one side.
“Come here, Tom. Your poor sister has had a hard time.
Life is hard on her. She has much to bear. And at this
minute she has nobody, in all the world—”</p>

<p>He came back; he took her hand; but wearily, indifferently,
not looking at her face. Suddenly her lip began to quiver.</p>

<p>“You must go on alone now,” she said. “There’s nothing
good to be looked for from Christian, and I am finished.
Failed. Gone to pieces. I can do no more. I am a poor,
useless woman, dependent on you all for my living. I could
never have dreamed, Tom, that I should be no help to you at
all. Now you stand quite alone, and upon you it depends to
keep up the honour and dignity of the family. May God help
you in the task.”</p>

<p>Two large, clear, childish tears rolled down over her cheeks,
which were beginning to show, very faintly, the first signs of
age.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER XI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Tony</span> lost no time. She went resolutely about her affair.
In the hope of quieting her, of bringing her slowly to a
different frame of mind, the Consul said but little. He asked
only one thing: that she should be very quiet and stop entirely
in the house—and Erica as well. Perhaps it would blow
over. The town did not need to know. The family Thursday
afternoon was put off on some pretext.</p>

<p>But on the very next day she wrote to Dr. Gieseke and
summoned him to Meng Street. She received him alone, in
the middle corridor room on the first floor, where a fire was
laid, and she had arranged a heavy table with ink and writing
materials and a quantity of foolscap paper from the office.
They sat down in two easy-chairs.</p>

<p>“Doctor Gieseke,” said Tony. She folded her arms, flung
back her head, and looked at the ceiling while she spoke.
“You are a man of experience, both professionally and personally.
I can speak openly with you.” And thereupon she
revealed to him the whole story about Babette and what had
happened in her sleeping-chamber. Dr. Gieseke regretted being
obliged to explain to her that neither the affair on the
stairs nor the insult she had undoubtedly received, the precise
nature of which she hesitated to divulge, was sufficient
ground for a divorce.</p>

<p>“Very good,” she said. “Thank you.”</p>

<p>And then, at her request, he gave an exposition of the
existing legal grounds for divorce, and an even longer discourse
after it, which had for its subject-matter the law touching
dowry rights. She listened with open mind and strained
attention; and then, with cordial thanks, dismissed Dr. Gieseke
for the time being.</p>

<p>She went downstairs and demanded audience of her brother
in his private office.</p>

<p>“Thomas,” she said, “please write to the man at once—I
do not like to mention his name. As far as the money goes,
I am perfectly informed on that subject. Let him speak.
Me he shall never see again, whatever he decides. If he
agrees to a divorce, we will ask him to give an accounting
and restore my <i>dos</i>. If he refuses, we need not be discouraged.
For, as you probably know, Permaneder’s right to my <i>dos</i>, is,
legally speaking a property right. We grant that. But on
the other hand, thank goodness, I have certain material rights
on my side—”</p>

<p>The Consul walked up and down with his hands behind
his back, his shoulders twitching nervously. Tony’s face,
as she uttered the word <i>dos</i> was too unutterably self-satisfied!</p>

<p>He had no time. Heaven knew he had no time. Let her
have patience, and wait, and bethink herself a hundred times.
His nearest duty was a journey to Hamburg—indeed, he must
go the very next day, for the purpose of a personal interview
with Christian. Christian had written for help, for money
which would have to come out of the Frau Consul’s inheritance.
His business was in frightful condition; he was in
constant difficulties. Yet he seemed to amuse himself royally
and went everywhere, to theatres, restaurants, and concert
halls. To judge from the debts now coming to light, which he
had been able to pile up on the credit of his family name, he
had been living far, far beyond his means. And they knew in
Meng Street, and at the club—yes, the whole town knew—who
was responsible. It was a certain female, a certain Aline
Puvogel, who lived alone with her two pretty children. Christian
was not the only Hamburg business man who possessed
her favours and spent money on her.</p>

<p>In short, Tony’s intentions in the matter of her divorce were
not the only dark spot in the Consul’s sky; and the journey to
Hamburg was pressing. Besides, it was altogether likely that
they would hear from Herr Permaneder.</p>

<p>The Consul went to Hamburg, and came back angry and
depressed. No word had come from Munich, and he felt
obliged to take the first step. He wrote; wrote rather coldly,
with curt condescension, to this effect: Antonie, during her life
with Permaneder, had been subjected to great disappointments—that
would not be denied. Without going into detail, it was
evident that she could never find happiness in this marriage.
Her wish that it should be dissolved must be justified, to the
mind of any reasonable person; and her determination not
to return to Munich was entirely unshakable. And he put
the question as to what were Herr Permaneder’s feelings in
view of the facts which he had just stated.</p>

<p>There were more days of suspense. And then came Herr
Permaneder’s reply.</p>

<p>He answered as no one had expected him to answer—not
Dr. Gieseke, nor the Frau Consul, not Thomas, nor Antonie
herself. He agreed, quite simply, to a divorce.</p>

<p>He wrote that he deeply regretted what had happened, but
that he respected Antonie’s wishes, as he saw that he and she
had “never hit it off.” If it were true that she had suffered
during those years through him, he begged her to forget and
forgive. As he would probably never see her and Erica again,
he sent them both his hearty good-wishes for all happiness on
this earth. And he signed himself, Alois Permaneder. In a
postscript he offered to make immediate restitution of the
dowry. He had enough without it to lead a life free from
care. He did not require to have notice given, for business
there was none to wind up, the house belonged to him, and
the money was ready any time.</p>

<p>Tony felt a slight twinge of shame, and was almost inclined,
for the first time, to admit that Herr Permaneder’s indifference
to money matters might have something good about it.</p>

<p>Now it was Dr. Gieseke’s turn again. He communicated
with the husband, and a plea of “mutual incompatibility”
was set up as ground for the divorce. The hearing began—Tony’s
second divorce case. She talked about it night and
day, and the Consul lost his temper several times. Tony
was in no state to share his feelings. She was entirely taken
up with words like “tangibilities,” “improvabilities,” “accessions,”
“productivity,” “dowry rights,” and the like, which
she used in season and out of season, with marvellous fluency,
her shoulders slightly raised. One point in Dr. Gieseke’s
long disquisitions had made a great impression on her: it
had to do with “treasure” found in any piece of property
that has constituted part of a dowry, which was to be regarded
as a component part of the dowry, to be liquidated
if the marriage came to an end. About this “treasure”—which
was, of course, non-existent—she talked to every soul
she knew: Ida Jungmann, Uncle Justus, poor Clothilde, the
Broad Street Buddenbrooks—and they, when they heard how
matters stood, just folded their hands in their laps and looked
at each other in speechless joy that this satisfaction, too,
had been vouchsafed them. Therese Weichbrodt was told of
it—Erica had gone to stay at the pension again—and
Madame Kethelsen too, though this last, for more than one
reason, understood not a single word.</p>

<p>Then came the day when the divorce was pronounced;
when the last formalities were gone through, and Tony
asked Thomas for the family papers and set down this last
event with her own hand. Yes, it was done. All that remained
was to get used to it.</p>

<p>She did it gallantly. She bore, with unscathed dignity, the
tiny dagger-thrusts of the ladies from Broad Street; she met
the Hagenströms and Möllendorpfs on the street and looked
with chilling indifference straight over their heads; and she
quite gave up going into society—the more easily that it had
for some years past forsaken her Mother’s house for her
brother’s. She had her own immediate family, the Frau
Consul, Tom, and Gerda; she had Ida Jungmann and her
motherly friend Sesemi Weichbrodt; and she had Erica,
upon whose future she probably built her own last secret
hopes, and upon whose aristocratic upbringing she expended
much care and thought.</p>

<p>Thus she lived, and thus time went on.</p>

<p>Later, in some way that was never quite clear, there came
to certain members of the family knowledge of that “word,”
the desperate word which had escaped from Herr Permaneder
on that never-to-be-forgotten night.</p>

<p>What was it, then, that he had said?</p>

<p>“Go to the devil, you filthy sprat-eating slut!”</p>

<p>And thus Tony Buddenbrook’s second marriage came to
an end.</p>
