<h2 class="nobreak" id="PART_SEVEN">PART SEVEN</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">A christening</span>—a christening in Broad Street!</p>

<p>All, everything is there that was dreamed of by Madame
Permaneder in the days of her expectancy. In the dining-room,
the maid-servant, moving noiselessly so as not to disturb
the services in the next room, is filling the cups with steaming
hot chocolate and whipped cream. There are quantities of
cups, crowded together on the great round tray with the gilded
shell-shaped handles. And Anton the butler is cutting a
towering layer-cake into slices, and Mamsell Jungmann is
arranging flowers and sweets in silver dessert-dishes, with her
head on one side, and both little fingers stuck out.</p>

<p>Soon the company will have seated themselves in the salon
and sitting-room, and all these delicacies will be handed
round. It is to be hoped they will hold out, since it is the
whole family which has gathered here, in the broader, if
not quite in the broadest sense of the word. For it is, through
the Överdiecks, connected distantly with the Kistenmakers,
and through them with the Möllendorpfs—and so on. One
simply must draw the line somewhere! But the Överdiecks
are represented, and, indeed, by no less a personage than
the head of the family, the venerable Doctor Kaspar Överdieck,
reigning Burgomaster, more than eighty years old.</p>

<p>He came in a carriage, and mounted the steps leaning on
his staff and Thomas Buddenbrook’s arm. His presence enhances
the dignity of the occasion—and, beyond a question,
this occasion is worthy of every dignity!</p>

<p>For within, in the salon, there is a flower-decked small
table, serving as an altar, with a young priest in black vestments
and a stiff snowy ruff like a millstone round his neck,
reciting the service; and there is a great, strapping, particularly
well-nourished person, richly arrayed in red and gold,
bearing upon her billowing arms a small something, half
smothered in laces and satin bows: an heir—a first-born son!
A Buddenbrook! Do we really grasp the meaning of the
fact?</p>

<p>Can we realize the thrill of that first whisper, that first little
hint that travelled from Broad Street to Mengstrasse? Or
Frau Permaneder’s speechless ecstasy, as she embraced her
mother, her brother, and—very gently—her sister-in-law?
And now, with the spring—the spring of the year 1861—he
has come: he, the heir of so many hopes, whom they have
expected for so many years, talked of him, longed for him,
prayed to God and tormented Dr. Grabow for him; at length
he has come—and looks most unimposing.</p>

<p>His tiny hands play among the gilt trimmings of his nurse’s
waist; his head, in a lace cap trimmed with pale blue ribbons,
lies sidewise on the pillow, turned heedlessly away from the
preacher; he stares out into the room, at all his relatives, with
an old, knowing look. Those eyes, under their long-lashed
lids, blend the light blue of the Father’s and the brown of
the Mother’s iris into a pale, indefinite, changeful golden-brown;
but bluish shadows lie in the deep corners on both
sides of the nose, and these give the little face, which
is hardly yet a face at all, an aged look not suited
to its four weeks of existence. But, please God, they
mean nothing—for has not his Mother the same? And she
is in perfectly good health. And anyhow, he lives—he lives,
and is a son; which was the cause, four weeks ago, for
great rejoicing.</p>

<p>He lives—and it might have been otherwise. The Consul
will never forget the grip of good Dr. Grabow’s hand, as he
said to him, four weeks ago, when he could leave the mother
and child: “Give thanks to God, my dear friend—there
wasn’t much to spare.” The Consul has not dared to ask
his meaning. He put from him in horror the thought that his
son—this tiny creature, yearned for in vain so many years—had
slipped into the world without breath to cry out, almost—<i>almost</i>—like
Antonie’s second daughter. But he knows that
that hour, four weeks ago, was a desperate one for mother
and child; and he bends tenderly over Gerda, who reclines
in an easy-chair in front of him, next his Mother, her feet,
in patent-leather shoes, crossed before her on a velvet cushion.</p>

<p>How pale she still is! And how strangely lovely in her pallor,
with that heavy dark-red hair and those mysterious eyes
that rest upon the preacher in half-veiled mockery! Herr
Andreas Pringsheim, <i>pastor marianus</i>, succeeded thus young
to the headship of St. Mary’s after old Kölling’s sudden death.
He holds his chin in the air and his hands prayerfully folded
beneath it. He has short, curly blond hair and a smooth-shaven,
bony face, with a somewhat theatrical range of expression,
from fanatical zeal to an exalted serenity. He comes
from Franconia, where he has been for some years, serving a
small Lutheran community among Catholics; and his effort
after a clear and moving delivery has resulted in exaggerated
mannerisms; an <i>r</i> rolled upon his front teeth and long,
obscure, or crudely accented vowel-sounds.</p>

<p>He gives thanks to God, in a voice now low and soft, now
loud and swelling—and the family listen: Frau Permaneder,
clothed in a dignity that hides her pride and her delight; Erica
Grünlich, now almost fifteen years old, a blooming young
girl with a long braid and her father’s rosy skin; and Christian,
who has arrived that morning, and sits letting his deep-set
eyes rove from side to side all over the room. Pastor
Tiburtius and his wife have not shrunk from the long journey,
but have come from Riga to be present at the ceremony.
The ends of Sievert Tiburtius’ long, thin whiskers are parted
over his shoulders, and his small grey eyes now and then
open wider and wider, most unexpectedly, and grow larger
and more prominent till they almost jump out of his head.
Clara’s gaze is dark and solemn and severe, and she sometimes
lifts her hand to a head that always seems to ache. But
they have brought a splendid present to the Buddenbrooks: a
huge brown bear stuffed in a standing position. A relative of
the Pastor’s shot him somewhere in the heart of Russia, and
now he stands below in the vestibule with a card-tray between
his paws.</p>

<p>The Krögers have their son Jürgen visiting them; he is a
post-office official in Rostock, a quiet, simply-dressed man.
Where Jacob is, nobody knows but his mother, who was an
Överdieck. She, poor, weak woman, secretly sells the household
silver to send money to the disinherited son. And the
ladies Buddenbrook are there, deeply rejoiced over the happy
family event—which does not prevent Pfiffi from remarking
that the child looks rather unhealthy: a view which the Frau
Consul, born Stüwing, and likewise Friederike and Henriette,
feel bound to endorse. But poor Clothilde, lean, grey, resigned,
and hungry, is moved by the words of Pastor Pringsheim
and the prospect of layer-cake and chocolate. The
guests not belonging to the family are Herr Friedrich Wilhelm
Marcus and Sesemi Weichbrodt.</p>

<p>Now the Pastor turns to the god-parents and instructs them
in their duty. Justus Kröger is one. Consul Buddenbrook
refused at first to ask him. “Why invite the old man to commit
a piece of folly?” he says. “He has frightful scenes with
his wife every day over Jacob; their little property is slowly
melting away—out of pure worry he is even beginning to be
careless in his dress! But you know what will happen: if
we ask him, he will send the child a heavy gold service and
refuse to be thanked for it!” But when Uncle Justus heard
who was to be asked in his place—Stephan Kistenmaker had
been mentioned—he was so enormously piqued that they had
to ask him after all. The gold mug he presented was, to
Thomas’s great relief, not exaggeratedly heavy.</p>

<p>And the second god-father? It is this dignified old gentleman
with the snow-white hair, high neck-band, and soft black
broadcloth coat with the red handkerchief sticking out of the
back pocket, sitting here bent over his stick, in the most
comfortable arm-chair in the house. It is, of course, Burgomaster
Dr. Överdieck. It is a great event—a triumph! Good
heavens, how could it have come about? he is hardly even a
relative! The Buddenbrooks must have dragged the old man
in by the hair! In fact, it <i>is</i> rather a feat: a little intrigue
planned by the Consul and Madame Permaneder. At first it
was merely a joke, born of the great relief of knowing that
mother and child were safe. “A boy, Tony,” cried the Consul.
“He ought to have the Burgomaster for god-father!”
But she took it up in earnest, whereupon he considered the
matter seriously and agreed to make a trial. They hid behind
Uncle Justus, and got him to send his wife to her sister-in-law,
the wife of Överdieck the lumber dealer. She accepted
the task of preparing the old father-in-law; then
Thomas Buddenbrook made a visit to the head of the state
and paid his respects—and the thing was done.</p>

<p>Now the nurse lifts up the child’s cap, and the Pastor cautiously
sprinkles two or three drops out of the gilt-lined silver
basin in front of him, upon the few hairs of little Buddenbrook,
as he slowly and impressively names the names with
which he is baptizing him: Justus, Johann, Kaspar. Follows
a short prayer, and then the relatives file by to bestow a kiss
upon the brow of the unconcerned little creature. Therese
Weichbrodt comes last, to whom the nurse has to stoop with
her burden; in return for which Sesemi gives him two kisses,
that go off with small explosions, and says, between them:
“You good che-ild!”</p>

<p>Three minutes later, the guests have disposed themselves
in salon and living-room, and the sweets are passed. Even
Pastor Pringsheim, the toes of his broad, shiny boots showing
under his black vestments, sits and sips the cool whipped
cream off his hot chocolate, chatting easily the while, and
wearing his serene expression, which is most effective by
way of contrast with his sermon. His manner says, as plainly
as words: “See how I can lay aside the priest and become the
jolly ordinary guest!” He is a versatile, an accommodating
sort of man. To the Frau Consul he speaks rather unctuously,
to Thomas and Gerda like a man of the world, and with Frau
Permaneder he is downright jocose, making jokes and gesturing
fluently. Now and then, whenever he thinks of it, he folds
his hands in his lap, tips back his head, glooms his brows,
and makes a long face. When he laughs he draws the air
in through his teeth in little jerks.</p>

<p>Suddenly there is a stir in the corridor, the servants are
heard laughing, and in the doorway appears a singular figure,
come to offer congratulations. It is Grobleben: Grobleben,
from whose thin nose, no matter what the time of year, there
ever hangs a drop, which never falls. Grobleben is a workman
in one of the Consul’s granaries, and he has an extra
job, too, at the house, as boots. Every morning early he
appears in Broad Street, takes the boots from before the door,
and cleans them below in the court. At family feasts he always
appears in holiday attire, presents flowers, and makes a
speech, in a whining, unctuous voice, with the drop pendent
from his nose. For this, he always gets a piece of money—but
that is <i>not</i> why he does it!</p>

<p>He wears a black coat—an old one of the Consul’s—greased
leather top-boots, and a blue woollen scarf round his
neck. In his wizened red hand he holds a bunch of pale-coloured
roses, which are a little past their best, and slowly
shed their petals on the carpet. He blinks with his small
red eyes, but apparently sees nothing. He stands still in the
doorway, with his flowers held out in front of him, and begins
straightway to speak. The old Frau Consul nods to
him encouragingly and makes soothing little noises, the Consul
regards him with one eyebrow lifted, and some of the
family—Frau Permaneder, for instance—put their handkerchiefs
to their mouths.</p>

<p>“I be a poor man, yer honour ’n’ ladies ’n’ gentlemen, but
I’ve a feelin’ hairt; ’n’ the happiness of my master comes
home to me, it do, seein’s he’s allus been so good t’ me; ’n’
so I’ve come, yer honour ’n’ ladies ’n’ gentlemen, to congratulate
the Herr Consul ’n’ the Frau Consul, ’n’ the whole respected
family, from a full hairt, ’n’ that the child may prosper,
for that they desarve fr’m God ’n’ man, for such a master
as Consul Buddenbrook there aren’t so many, he’s a noble
gentleman, ’n’ our Lord will reward him for all....”</p>

<p>“Splendid, Grobleben! That was a beautiful speech.
Thank you very much, Grobleben. What are the roses for?”</p>

<p>But Grobleben has not nearly done. He strains his whining
voice and drowns the Consul out.</p>

<p>“... ’n’ I say th’ Lord will reward him, him and the
whole respected family; ’n’ when his time has come to stan’
before His throne, for stan’ we all must, rich <i>and</i> poor, ’n’
one’ll have a fine polished hard-wood coffin ’n’ ’tother ’n old
box, yet all on us must come to mother earth at th’ last, yes,
we must all come to her at th’ last—to mother earth—to
mother—”</p>

<p>“Oh, come, come, Grobleben! This isn’t a funeral, it’s a
christening. Get along with your mother earth!”</p>

<p>“... ’n’ these be a few flowers,” concludes Grobleben.</p>

<p>“Thank you, Grobleben, thank you. This is too much—what
did you pay for them, man? But I haven’t heard such
a speech as that for a long time! Wait a minute—here, go
out and give yourself a treat, in honour of the day!” And
the Consul puts his hand on the old man’s shoulder and
gives him a thaler.</p>

<p>“Here, my good man,” says the Frau Consul. “And I hope
you love our blessed Lord?”</p>

<p>“I be lovin’ him from my hairt, Frau Consul, thet’s the
holy truth!” And Grobleben gets another thaler from her,
and a third from Frau Permaneder, and retires with a bow
and a scrape, taking the roses with him by mistake, except for
those already fallen on the carpet.</p>

<p>The Burgomaster takes his leave now, and the Consul accompanies
him down to his carriage. This is the signal for
the party to break up—for Gerda Buddenbrook must rest.
The old Frau Consul, Tony, Erica, and Mamsell Jungmann
are the last to go.</p>

<p>“Well, Ida,” says the Consul, “I have been thinking it over:
you took care of us all, and when little Johann gets a bit
older— He still has the monthly nurse now, and after that
he will still need a day-nurse, I suppose—but will you be
willing to move over to us when the time comes?”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, Herr Consul, if your wife is satisfied.”</p>

<p>Gerda is content to have it so, and thus it is settled.</p>

<p>In the act of leaving, however, and already at the door,
Frau Permaneder turns. She comes back to her brother and
kisses him on both cheeks, and says: “It has been a lovely
day, Tom. I am happier than I have been for years. We
Buddenbrooks aren’t quite at the last gasp yet, thank God,
and whoever thinks we are is mightily mistaken. Now that
we have little Johann—it is so beautiful that he is christened
Johann—it looks to me as if quite a new day will dawn for
us all!”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Christian Buddenbrook</span>, proprietor of the firm of H. C. F.
Purmeister and Company of Hamburg, came into his brother’s
living-room, holding in his hand his modish grey hat and his
walking-stick with the nun’s bust. Tom and Gerda sat reading
together. It was half-past nine on the evening of the
christening day.</p>

<p>“Good evening,” said Christian. “Oh, Thomas, I must
speak with you at once.—Please excuse me, Gerda.—It is urgent,
Thomas.”</p>

<p>They went into the dark dining-room, where the Consul
lighted a gas-jet on the wall, and looked at his brother. He
expected nothing good. Except for the first greeting, he had
had no opportunity to speak with Christian, but he had looked
at him, during the service, and noted that he seemed unusually
serious, and even more restless than common: in the course
of Pastor Pringsheim’s discourse he had left the room for
several minutes. Thomas had not written him since the day
in Hamburg when he had paid over into his brother’s hands
an advance of 10,000 marks current on his inheritance, to
settle his indebtedness. “Just go on as you are going,” he
had said, “and you’ll soon run through all your money. As
far as I am concerned, I hope you will cross my path very
little in future. You have put my friendship to too hard a
test in these three years.” Why was he here now? Something
must be driving him.</p>

<p>“Well?” asked the Consul.</p>

<p>“I’m done,” Christian said. He let himself down sidewise
on one of the high-backed chairs around the dining-table,
and held his hat and stick between his thin knees.</p>

<p>“May I ask what it is you are done with, and what brings
you to me?” said the Consul. He remained standing.</p>

<p>“I’m done,” repeated Christian, shaking his head from side
to side with frightful earnestness and letting his little round
eyes stray restlessly back and forth. He was now thirty-three
years old, but he looked much older. His reddish-blond hair
was grown so thin that nearly all the cranium was bare. His
cheeks were sunken, the cheek-bones protruded sharply, and
between them, naked, fleshless, and gaunt, stood the huge
hooked nose.</p>

<p>“If it were only this—!” he went on, and ran his hand down
the whole of his left side, very close, but not touching it.
“It isn’t a pain, you know—it is a misery, a continuous, indefinite
ache. Dr. Drögemuller in Hamburg tells me that my
nerves on this side are all too short. Imagine, on my whole
left side, my nerves aren’t long enough! Sometimes I think
I shall surely have a stroke here, on this side, a permanent
paralysis. You have no idea. I never go to sleep properly.
My heart doesn’t beat, and I start up suddenly, in a perfectly
terrible fright. That happens not once but ten times before I
get to sleep. I don’t know if you know what it is. I’ll tell
you about it more precisely. It is—”</p>

<p>“Not now,” the Consul said coldly. “Am I to understand
that you have come here to tell me this? I suppose not.”</p>

<p>“No, Thomas. If it were only that—but it is not that—alone.
It is the business. I can’t go on with it.”</p>

<p>“Your affairs are in confusion again?” The Consul did
not start, he did not raise his voice. He asked the question
quite calmly, and looked sidewise at his brother, with a cold,
weary glance.</p>

<p>“No, Thomas. For to tell you the truth—it is all the same
now—I never really was in order, even with the ten thousand,
as you know yourself. They only saved me from putting up
the shutters at once. The thing is—I had more losses at once,
in coffee—and with the failure in Antwerp— That’s the
truth. So then I didn’t do any more business; I just sat still.
But one has to live—so now there are notes and other debts—five
thousand thaler. You don’t know the hole I’m in. And
on top of everything else, this agony—”</p>

<p>“Oh, so you just sat still, did you?” cried the Consul, beside
himself. His self-control was gone now. “You let the
wagon stick in the mud and went off to enjoy yourself! You
think I don’t know the kind of life you’ve been living—theatres
and circus and clubs—and women—”</p>

<p>“You mean Aline. Yes, Thomas, you have very little understanding
for that sort of thing, and it’s my misfortune, perhaps,
that I have so much. You are right when you say it has
cost me too much; and it will cost me a goodish bit more, for—I’ll
tell you something, just here between two brothers—the
third child, the little girl, six months old, she is my child.”</p>

<p>“You fool, you!”</p>

<p>“Don’t say that, Thomas. You should be just, even if you
are angry, to her and to—why shouldn’t it be my child? And
as for Aline, she isn’t in the least worthless, and you ought
not to say she is. She is not at all promiscuous; she broke
with Consul Holm on my account, and he has much more
money than I have. That’s how decent she is. No, Thomas,
you simply can’t understand what a splendid creature she is—and
<i>healthy</i>—she is as <i>healthy</i>—!” He repeated the word,
and held up one hand before his face with the fingers crooked,
in the same gesture as when he used to tell about “Maria”
and the depravity of London. “You should see her teeth when
she laughs. I’ve never found any other teeth to compare with
them, not in Valparaiso, or London, or anywhere else in the
world. I’ll never forget the evening I first met her, in the
oyster-room, at Uhlich’s. She was living with Consul Holm
then. Well, I told her a story or so, and was a bit friendly;
and when I went home with her afterwards—well, Thomas,
that’s a different sort of feeling from the one you have when
you do a good stroke of business! But you don’t like to hear
about such things—I can see that already—and anyhow, it’s
over with. I’m saying good-bye to her, though I shall keep
in touch with her on account of the child. I’ll pay up everything
I owe in Hamburg, and shut up shop. I can’t go on.
I’ve talked with Mother, and she is willing to give me the
five thousand thaler to start with, so I can put things in order;
and I hope you will agree to it, for it is much better to say
quite simply that Christian Buddenbrook is winding up his
business and going abroad, than for me to make a failure.
You think so too, don’t you? I intend to go to London again,
Thomas, and take a position. It isn’t good for me to be independent—I
can see that more and more. The responsibility—whereas
in a situation one just goes home quite care-free,
at the end of the day. And I liked living in London. Do
you object?”</p>

<p>During this exposition, the Consul had turned his back on
his brother, and stood with his hands in his pockets, describing
figures on the floor with his foot.</p>

<p>“Very good, go to London,” he said, shortly, and without
turning more than half-way toward his brother, he passed
into the living-room.</p>

<p>But Christian followed him. He went up to Gerda, who sat
there alone, reading, and put out his hand.</p>

<p>“Good night, Gerda. Well, Gerda, I’m off for London.
Yes, it’s remarkable how one gets tossed about hither and yon.
Now it’s again into the unknown, into a great city, you know,
where one meets an adventure at every third step, and sees
so much of life. Strange—do you know the feeling? One
gets it here—sort of in the pit of the stomach—it’s very odd.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">James Möllendorpf</span>, the oldest of the merchant senators,
died in a grotesque and horrible way. The instinct of self-preservation
became very weak in this diabetic old man; and
in the last years of his life he fell a victim to a passion for
cakes and pastries. Dr. Grabow, as the Möllendorpf family
physician, had protested energetically, and the distressed relatives
employed gentle constraint to keep the head of the
family from committing suicide with sweet bake-stuffs. But
the old Senator, mental wreck as he was, rented a room somewhere,
in some convenient street, like Little Groping Alley, or
Angelswick, or Behind-the-Wall—a little hole of a room,
whither he would secretly betake himself to consume sweets.
And there they found his lifeless body, the mouth still full
of half-masticated cake, the crumbs upon his coat and upon the
wretched table. A mortal stroke had supervened, and put a
stop to slow dissolution.</p>

<p>The horrid details of the death were kept as much as possible
from the family, but they flew about the town, and were
discussed at length on the Bourse, in the club, and at the
Harmony, in all the business offices, in the Assembly of Burgesses—likewise
at all the balls, dinners, and evening parties,
for the death occurred in February of the year ’62, and the
season was in full swing. Even the Frau Consul’s friends
talked about it, on the Jerusalem evenings, in the pauses of
Lea Gerhardt’s reading aloud; the little Sunday-school children
discussed it in awesome whispers as they crossed the Buddenbrook
entry; and Herr Stuht, in Bell-Founders’ Street, went
into ample detail over it with his wife, who moved in the
highest circles.</p>

<p>But interest could not long remain concentrated upon the
past. And even with the first rumour of the old man’s death,
the great question had at once sprung up: who was to succeed
him?</p>

<p>What suspense, what subterranean activity! A stranger, intent
on the sights of the mediaeval town, would have noticed
nothing; but beneath the surface there was unimaginable
bustle and commotion, as one firm and unassailable honest
conviction after another was exploded; and slowly, slowly the
while, divergent views approached each other! Passions are
stirred, Ambition and Vanity wrestle together in silence.
Dead and buried hopes spring once more to life—and again
are blasted. Old Kurz, the merchant, in Bakers’ Alley, who
gets three or four votes at every election, will sit quaking at
home on the fatal day, and listen to the shouting, but he will
not be elected this time either. He will continue to take his
walks abroad, displaying outwardly his usual mingling of
civic pride and self-satisfaction: but he will bear down with
him into the grave the secret chagrin of never having been
elected Senator.</p>

<p>James Möllendorpf’s death was discussed at the Buddenbrook
Thursday dinner-table; and Frau Permaneder, after the
proper expressions of sympathy, began to let her tongue play
upon her upper lip and look across artfully at her brother.
The Buddenbrook ladies marked the look. They exchanged
piercing glances, and with one accord shut their eyes and their
lips tightly together. The Consul had, for a second, responded
to the sly smile his sister gave him, and then given the talk
another turn. He knew that the thought which Tony hugged
to her breast in secret was being spoken in the street.</p>

<p>Names were suggested and rejected, others came up and
were sifted out. Henning Kurz in Bakers’ Alley was too old.
They needed new blood. Consul Huneus, the lumber dealer,
whose millions would have weighted the scale heavily in his
favour, was constitutionally ineligible, as his brother already
sat in the Senate. Consul Eduard Kistenmaker, the wine
dealer, and Consul Hermann Hagenström were names that kept
their places on the list. But from the very first was heard
the name of Thomas Buddenbrook; and as election-day approached,
it grew constantly plainer that he and Hermann
Hagenström were the favoured candidates.</p>

<p>Hermann Hagenström had his admirers and hangers-on—there
was no doubt of that. His zeal in public affairs, the
spectacular rise of the firm of Strunck and Hagenström, the
showy house the Consul kept, the luxurious life he led, the
pâtés-de-foie-gras he ate for breakfast—all these could not fail
to make an impression. This large, rather over-stout man
with the short, full, reddish beard and the snub nose coming
down flat on his upper lip, this man whose grandfather nobody
knew, not even himself, and whose father had made himself
socially impossible by a rich but doubtful marriage; this man
had become a brother-in-law of the Huneus’ and the Möllendorpfs,
had ranged his name alongside those of the five or six
reigning families in the town, and was undeniably a remarkable
and a respected figure. The novel and therewith the attractive
element in his personality—that which singled him out
for a leading position in the eyes of many—was its liberal and
tolerant strain. His light, large way of making money and
spending it again differed fundamentally from the patient,
persistent toil and the inherited principles of his fellow merchants.
This man stood on his own feet, free from the fetters
of tradition and ancestral piety; and all the old ways were foreign
to him. His house was not one of the ancient patrician
mansions, built with senseless waste of space, in tall white galleries
mounting above a stone-paved ground floor. His home
on Sand Street, the southern extension of Broad Street, was a
modern dwelling, not conforming to any set style of architecture,
with a simple painted façade, but furnished inside
with every luxury and planned with the cleverest economy of
space. Recently, on the occasion of one of his large evening
parties, he had invited a prima donna from the government
theatre, to sing after dinner to his guests—among them his
witty, art-loving brother—and had paid her an enormous fee
for her services. Hermann Hagenström was not the man to
vote in the Assembly for the application of large sums of
money to preserve and restore the town’s mediaeval monuments.
But it was a fact that he was the first, absolutely the first man
in town to light his house and his offices with gas. Yes, if
Consul Hagenström could be said to represent any tradition
whatever, it was the free, progressive, tolerant, unprejudiced
habit of thought which he had inherited from his
father, old Heinrich—and on this was based all the admiration
people undoubtedly felt for him.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook’s prestige was of a different kind.
People honoured in him not only his own personality, but
the personalities of his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather
as well: quite apart from his own business and public
achievement, he was the representative of a hundred years of
honourable tradition. And the easy, charming way, indeed,
with which he carried the family standard made no small part
of his success. What distinguished him, even among his professional
fellow-citizens, was an unusual degree of formal
culture, which, wherever he went, aroused both wonder and
respect in about equal degrees.</p>

<p>On Thursdays at the Buddenbrooks’, the coming election
received only brief and passing comment in the presence of
the Consul. Whenever it was mentioned, the old Frau Consul
discreetly averted her light eyes. But Frau Permaneder, now
and then, could not refrain from displaying her astonishing
knowledge of the Constitution. She had gone very thoroughly
into the decrees touching the election of a member of the
Senate, precisely as once she thoroughly informed herself on
the laws governing divorce. She talked about voting chambers,
ballots, and electors, she weighed all the possible
eventualities, she could recite verbatim and glibly the oath
taken by the voters. She spoke of the “free and frank discussion”
which the Constitution ordains must be held over
each name upon the list of candidates, and vivaciously wished
she might be present when Hermann Hagenström’s character
was being pulled to pieces! A moment later she leaned over
and began to count the prune-pits on her brother’s dessert-plate:
tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor—finishing triumphantly
with “senator” when she came to the last pit. But after
dinner she could not hold in any longer. She took her
brother’s arm and drew him into the bow-window.</p>

<p>“Oh, Tom! <i>Tom!</i> Suppose you are really elected—if our
coat-of-arms is put up in the Senate-chamber at the Town Hall
I shall just die of joy, I know I shall. I shall fall dead at
the news—you’ll see!”</p>

<p>“Now, Tony dear! Have a little self-control, a little
dignity, I beg of you. You are not usually lacking in dignity.
Am I going around like Henning Kurz? We amount
to something even without the ‘Senator.’ And I hope you
won’t die, whichever way it turns out!”</p>

<p>And the agitations, the consultations, the struggles of
opinion took their course. Consul Peter Döhlmann, the rake
with a business now entirely ruined, which existed only in
name, and the twenty-seven-year-old daughter whose inheritance
he was eating up, played his part by attending two
dinners, one given by Thomas Buddenbrook and the other by
Herman Hagenström, and both times addressing his host, in
his loud, resounding voice, as “Senator.” But Siegismund
Gosch, old Gosch the broker, went about like a raging lion,
and engaged to throttle anybody, out of hand, who wasn’t
minded to vote for Consul Buddenbrook.</p>

<p>“Consul Buddenbrook, gentlemen—ah, there’s a man for
you! I stood at his father’s side in the ’48, when, with a
word, he tamed the unleashed fury of the mob. His father,
and his father’s father before him, would have been Senator
were there any justice on this earth!”</p>

<p>But at bottom it was not so much Consul Buddenbrook
himself whose personality fired Gosch’s soul to its innermost
depths. It was rather the young Frau Consul, Gerda
Arnoldsen. Not that the broker had ever exchanged a word
with her. He did not belong to her circle of wealthy
merchant families, nor sit at their tables, nor pay visits to
them. But, as we have seen, Gerda Buddenbrook had but to
arrive in the town to be singled out by the roving fancy of
the sinister broker, ever on the look-out for the unusual.
With unerring instinct he divined that this figure was calculated
to add content to his unsatisfied existence, and he
made himself the slave of one who had scarcely ever heard
his name. Since then he encompassed in his reveries this
nervous, exceedingly reserved lady, to whom he had not even
been presented: he lifted his Jesuit hat to her, on the street,
to her great surprise, and treated her to a pantomime of
cringing treachery, gloating over her the while in his
thoughts as a tiger might over his trainer. This dull
existence would afford him no chance of committing atrocities
for this woman’s sake—ah, if it only would, with what
devilish indifference would he answer for them! Its stupid
conventions prevented him from raising her, by deeds of
blood and horror, to an imperial throne!—And thus, nothing
was left but for him to go to the Town Hall and cast his
vote in favour of her furiously respected husband—and, perhaps,
one day, to dedicate to her his forthcoming transition of
Lope de Vega.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Every</span> vacant seat in the Senate must, according to the
Constitution, be filled within four weeks. Three of them have
passed, and this is election-day—a day of thaw, at the end of
February.</p>

<p>It is about one o’clock, and people are thronging into Broad
Street. They are thronging before the Town Hall, with its
ornamental glazed-brick façade, its pointed towers and
turrets mounting toward a whitish grey sky, its covered
steps supported on outstanding columns, its pointed arcades,
through which there is a glimpse of the market-place and
the fountain. The crowd stands steadfastly in the dirty
slush that melts beneath their feet; they look into each other’s
faces and then straight ahead again, and crane their necks.
For beyond that portal, in the Council Room, in fourteen arm-chairs
arranged in a semicircle sit the electors, who have
been chosen from the Senate and the Assembly and await the
proposals of the voting chambers.</p>

<p>The affair has spun itself out. It appears that the debate
in the chambers will not die down; the struggle is so bitter
that up to now not one single unanimous choice has been put
before the Council—otherwise the Burgomaster would at
once announce an election. Extraordinary! Rumours—nobody
knows whence, nobody knows how—come from
within the building and circulate in the street. Perhaps Herr
Kaspersen, the elder of the two beadles, who always refers to
himself as a “servant of the State,” is standing inside there
and telling what he hears, out of the corner of his mouth,
through his shut teeth, with his eyes turned the other way!
The story goes that proposals have been laid before the
sitting, but that each of the three chambers has turned in a
different name: namely Hagenström, Kistenmaker, and Buddenbrook.
A secret ballot must now be taken, with ballot-papers—it
is to be hoped that it will show a clear plurality!
For people without overshoes are suffering, and stamping
their feet to warm them.</p>

<p>The waiting crowd is made up of all sorts and conditions.
There are sea-faring characters, with bare tattoed necks and
their hands in the pockets of their sailor trousers; grain-porters
with their incomparably respectable countenances,
and their blouses and knee-breeches of black glazed calico;
drivers who have clambered down from their wagons of
piled-up sacks, and stand whip in hand to wait for the
decision; servant-maids in neckerchiefs, aprons and thick
striped petticoats with little white caps perched on the backs
of their heads and market-baskets hanging on their bare arms;
fish and vegetable women with their flat straw baskets—even
a couple of pretty farm girls with Dutch caps, short
skirts, and long flowing sleeves coming out from their gaily-embroidered
stay-bodies. Mingled among these, burghers,
shop-keepers who have come out hatless from neighbouring
shops to exchange their views, sprucely-dressed young men
who are apprentices in the business of their fathers or their
fathers’ friends—and schoolboys with satchels and bundles
of books.</p>

<p>Two labourers with bristling sailor beards, stand chewing
their tobacco; behind them is an excited lady, craning her
neck this way and that to get a glimpse of the Town Hall
between their powerful shoulders. She wears a long evening
cloak trimmed with brown fur, which she holds together from
the inside with both hands. Her face is well covered with
a thick brown veil. She shifts her feet about in the melting
snow.</p>

<p>“Gawd! Kurz bain’t gettin’ it this time, nuther, be he?”
says the one labourer to the other.</p>

<p>“Naw, ye mutton-head, ’tis certain he bain’t. There’s no
more talk o’ him. Th’ votin’s between Hagenström, Buddenbrook,
’n’ Kistenmaker. ’Tis all about they,—now.”</p>

<p>“’Tis whether which one o’ th’ three be ahead o’ the others,
eh?”</p>

<p>“So ’tis; yes, they do say so.”</p>

<p>“Then I’m minded they’ll be choosin’ Hagenström.”</p>

<p>“Eh, smarty—so they’ll be choosin’ Hagenström? Ye can
tell that to yer grandmother!” And therewith he spits
his tobacco-juice on the ground close to his own feet, the
crowd being too dense to admit of a trajectory. He takes
hold of his trousers in both hands and pulls them up higher
under his belt, and goes on: “Hagenström, he’s a great pig—he
be so fat he can’t breathe through his own nose! If so
be it’s all o’er wi’ Kurz then I’m fer Buddenbrook. ’Tis
a very shrewd chap.”</p>

<p>“So ’tis, so ’tis. But Hagenström, he’s got the money.”</p>

<p>“That bain’t the question—’tis no matter o’ riches.”</p>

<p>“’n’ then this Buddenbrook—he be so devilish fine wi’ his
cuffs ’n’ his silk tie ’n’ his stickin’-out moustaches; hast seen
him walk? He hops along like a bird.”</p>

<p>“Ye ninny, that bain’t the question, no more’n th’ other.”</p>

<p>“They say his sister’ve put away two men a’ready.” The
lady in the fur cloak trembles visibly.</p>

<p>“Eh, that soart o’ thing—what do we know about it?
Likely the Consul he couldn’t help it hisself.”</p>

<p>The lady in the veil thinks to herself, “He couldn’t, indeed!
Thank God for that,” and presses her hands together, inside
her cloak.</p>

<p>“’n’ then,” adds the Buddenbrook partisan, “didn’t the
Burgomaster his own self stan’ godfeyther to his son? Can’t
ye tell somethin’ by that?”</p>

<p>“Yes, can’t you indeed?” thinks the lady. “Thank heaven,
that did do some good.” She starts. A fresh rumour from the
Town Hall, running zigzag through the crowd, has reached
her ears. The balloting, it seems, has not been decisive.
Eduard Kistenmaker, indeed, has received fewer votes than
the other two candidates, and his name has been dropped.
But the struggle goes on between Buddenbrook and Hagenström.
A sapient citizen remarks that if the voting continues
to be even, it will be necessary to appoint five arbitrators.</p>

<p>A voice, down in front at the entrance steps, shouts
suddenly: “Heine Seehas is ’lected—’rah for Heine
Seehas!” Heine Seehas, be it known, is an habitual
drunkard, who peddles hot bread on a little wagon through
the streets. Everybody roars with laughter, and stands on
tip-toe to see the wag who is responsible for the joke. The
lady in the veil is seized with a nervous giggle; her shoulders
shake for a moment, and then give a shrug which expresses as
plainly as words: “Is this the time for tom-foolery like
that?” She collects herself again, and stares with intensity
between the two labourers at the Town Hall. But almost
at the same moment her hands slip from her cloak, so that it
opens in front, her figure relaxes, her shoulders droop, she
stands there entirely crushed.</p>

<p>Hagenström!—The word seems to have come from nobody
knows where—down from the sky, or up from the earth. It
is everywhere at once. There is no contradiction. So it is
decided. Hagenström! Hagenström it is, then. One may
as well go home. The lady in the veil might have known.
It was ever thus. She will go home—she feels the tears
rising in her throat.</p>

<p>This state of things has lasted a second or so, when there
occurs a shouting and a backward jostling of the throng.
It runs through the whole assemblage, as those in front press
back those behind, and at the same time something red
appears in the doorway. It is the coats of the beadles
Kaspersen and Uhlefeldt. They are in full-dress uniform,
with white riding breeches, three-cornered hats, yellow gauntlet
gloves, and short dress swords. They appear side by side,
and make their way through the crowd, which falls back
before them.</p>

<p>They move like fate: silent, resolved, inexorable, not
looking to right or left, with gaze directed toward the ground.
They take, according to instructions, the route marked out
by the election. And it is <i>not</i> in the direction of Sand Street!
They have turned to the right—they are going down Broad
Street!</p>

<p>The lady in the veil cannot believe her eyes. However,
all about her, people are seeing just what she sees; they are
pushing on after the beadles, and saying to each other:
“It isn’t Hagenström, it’s Buddenbrook!” And a group of
gentlemen emerge from the portal, in excited conversation,
and hurry with rapid steps down Broad Street, to be the first
to offer congratulations.</p>

<p>Then the lady holds her cloak together and runs for it.
She runs, indeed, as seldom lady runs. Her veil blows up,
revealing her flushed face—no matter for that; and one of
her furred goloshes keeps flapping open in the sloppy snow
and hindering her frightfully: yet she outruns them all!
She gains the house at the corner of Bakers’ Street, she rings
the alarm-bell at the vestibule door—fire, murder, thieves!—she
shouts at the maid who opens: “They’re coming,
Kathrin, they’re coming,” takes the stairs, and storms into
the living-room. Her brother himself sits there, certainly a
little pale. He puts down his paper and makes a gesture,
almost as if to ward her off. But she puts her arms
about him, and repeats: “They’re coming, Tom, they’re
coming! You are the man—and Hermann Hagenström is
out!”</p>

<p>That was Friday. On the following day, Senator Buddenbrook
stood in the Council Hall, in the seat of the deceased
James Möllendorpf, and in the presence of the City Fathers
there assembled, and the Delegation of Burgesses, he took
the oath: “I will conscientiously perform the duties of my
office, strive with all my power for the good of the State,
faithfully obey the Constitution, honourably pursue the public
weal, and in the discharge of my office, regard neither my
own advantage nor that of my relatives and friends. I will
support the laws of the State and do justice on all alike,
whether rich or poor. In all things where secrecy is needful,
I will not speak, and especially will I not reveal what is given
me to keep silent. So help me God!”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Our</span> desires and our performance are conditioned by certain
needs of our nervous systems which are very hard to define
in words. What people called Thomas Buddenbrook’s
“vanity”—his care for his personal appearance, his extravagant
dressing—was at bottom not vanity but something
else entirely. It was, originally, no more than the effort of
a man of action to be certain, from head to toe, of the
adequacy and correctness of his bearing. But the demands
made by himself and by others upon his talents and his
capacities were constantly increased. He was overwhelmed
by public and private affairs. When the Senate sat to appoint
its committees, one of the main departments, the administration
of the taxes, fell to his lot. But tolls, railways, and
other administrative business claimed his time as well; and
he presided at hundreds of committees that called into play
all the capacities he possessed: he had to summon every ounce
of his flexibility, his foresight, his power to charm, in order
not to wound the sensibilities of his elders, to defer constantly
to them, and yet to keep the reins in his own hands. If
his so-called vanity notably increased at the same time,
if he felt a greater and greater need to refresh himself
bodily, to renew himself, to change his clothing several times
a day, all this meant simply that Thomas Buddenbrook,
though he was barely thirty-seven years old, was losing his
elasticity, was wearing himself out fast.</p>

<p>When good Dr. Grabow begged him to relax a little, he
answered, “Oh, my dear Doctor, I haven’t reached that point
yet!” By which he meant that he still had an interminable
deal of work to do before he arrived at the goal and could
settle back to enjoy himself. The truth was, he hardly
believed himself in such a condition. Yet it drove him on,
it left him no peace. Even when he seemed to rest, as he
sat with the paper after dinner, a thousand ideas whirled
about in his brain, while the veins stood out on his temples,
and he twisted the ends of his moustaches with a certain still
intensity of passion. He concentrated with equal violence
whether the subject of his thought was a business manœuvre,
a public speech, or a decision to renew his entire stock of
body linen, in order to be sure that he had enough, for a
while, at least.</p>

<p>If such wholesale buying afforded him passing relief and
satisfaction, he could indulge himself in it without scruple,
for his business at this time was as brilliant as ever it had
been in his grandfather’s day. The repute of the firm grew,
not only in the town but round about, and throughout the
whole community he continued to be held in ever greater
regard. His talents were admitted on all hands, with admiration
or envy as the case might be; while he himself
wrestled ceaselessly, at times despairingly, to evolve an order
and method of work which should enable him to overtake the
flights of his own restless imagination.</p>

<p>Thus, when, in the summer of 1863, Senator Buddenbrook
went about with his mind full of plans for the building of a
great new house, it was not arrogance which impelled him.
He was driven by his own inability to be quiet—which his
fellow-burghers would have been right in ascribing to his
“vanity”—for it was another manifestation of the same thing.
To make a new home, and a radical change in his outward
life; to pack up, to re-install himself afresh, to weed out
all the accumulations of bygone years and set aside everything
old or superfluous: all this, even in imagination, gave
him feelings of freshness, newness, spotlessness, stimulation.
All of which he must have craved indeed, for he attacked the
plan with great enthusiasm, and already had his eye on a
suitable location.</p>

<p>There was a property of considerable extent at the lower
end of Fishers’ Lane. The house, grey with age, in bad
repair, was offered for sale on the death of its owner,
an ancient spinster, the relic of a forgotten family, who had
dwelt there alone. On this piece of land the Senator thought
to build his house; and he surveyed it with a speculative eye
when he passed the spot on his way to the harbour. The
neighbourhood was pleasant enough—good burgher-houses,
the most modest among them being the narrow little façade
opposite, with a small flower-shop on the ground floor.</p>

<p>He threw himself into the affair. He made a rough estimate
of the expense involved, and though the sum he fixed
provisionally was by no means a small one, he felt he could
compass it without undue effort. But then he would suddenly
have the thought that the whole thing was a senseless folly,
and confess to himself that his present house had plenty of
room for himself, his wife, their child, and their servants.
But the half-conscious cravings were stronger; and in the
desire to have them strengthened and justified from outside,
he first revealed his plan to his sister.</p>

<p>“Well, Tony, what do you say to it? The whole house is
a sort of hand-box, isn’t it?—and the winding stair is really
a joke. It isn’t quite the thing, is it? and now that you’ve
had me made Senator—in a word, don’t you think I owe it to
myself?”</p>

<p>Ah, in the eyes of Madame Permaneder, what was there he
did not owe to himself? She was full of practical enthusiasm.
She crossed her arms on her breast and walked up
and down with her shoulders raised and her head in the air.</p>

<p>“Of course you do, Tom; goodness gracious, yes! What
possible objection could there be? And when you have
married an Arnoldsen, with a hundred thousand thaler to
boot— I’m very proud to be the first you’ve told it to. It
was lovely of you. And if you do do it, Tom, why, you
must do it well, that’s what I say. It must be grand.”</p>

<p>“H’m, well, yes, I agree with you. I’m willing to spend
something on it. I’ll have Voigt, and we’ll go over the plans
together. Voigt has a great deal of taste.”</p>

<p>The second opinion which Thomas called in was Gerda’s.
She praised the idea unreservedly. The confusion of moving
would not be pleasant, but the prospect of a large music-room
with good acoustic properties impressed her most
happily. As for the old Frau Consul, she was quite prepared
to think of the new house as a logical consequence of all the
other blessings which had fallen to her lot, and to give
thanks to God therefor, accordingly. Since the birth of the
heir, and the recent election, she gave freer expression to her
motherly pride, and had a way of saying “my son, the
Senator,” which the Broad Street Buddenbrooks found most
offensive.</p>

<p>These aging spinsters felt that all too little shadow set off
the sunshine through which Thomas’s outward life ran its
brilliant course. It was no great consolation—at the Thursday
family gatherings—to pour contempt on poor, good-natured
Clothilde. As for Christian—Christian, through the
good offices of Mr. Richardson, his former chief, had found a
situation in London, whence he had lately telegraphed a
fantastic desire to marry Fräulein Puvogel, an idea upon
which his mother had firmly set her foot—Christian now belonged,
quite simply, to Jacob Kröger’s class, and was, as
it were, a dead issue. They consoled themselves, to some
extent, with the little weaknesses of the old Frau Consul and
Frau Permaneder. They would bring the conversation
round to the subject of coiffures: the Frau Consul was
capable of saying, in the blandest way, that she always wore
“her” hair very simply, whereas it was plain to any one
gifted by God with intelligence, and certainly to the Misses
Buddenbrook, that the immutable red-blonde hair under the
old lady’s cap could no longer by any stretch be called “her”
hair. Still more gratifying was it to get Cousin Tony
started on the subject of those nefarious persons who had
formerly had an influence on her life. Teary Trietschke!
Grünlich! Permaneder! Hagenström!—Tony, when she was
egged on to it, would utter these names into the air like so
many little trumpetings of disgust, with her shoulders well up.
They had a sweet sound in the ears of the daughters of Uncle
Gotthold.</p>

<p>They could not dissimulate, and they would accept no
responsibility for omitting to say that little Johann was frightfully
slow about learning to walk and talk. They were really
quite right: it was an admitted fact that Hanno—this was the
nickname adopted by the Frau Senator for her son—at a
time when he was able to call all the members of his family
by name with fair correctness, was incapable of pronouncing
the names Friederike, Henriette, and Pfiffi so that any one
could understand what he said. And at fifteen months he had
not taken a single step alone. The Misses Buddenbrook,
shaking their heads pessimistically, declared that the child
would be halt and tongue-tied to the end of his days.</p>

<p>They later admitted the error of their gloomy prophecy;
but nobody, in fact, denied that Hanno was a little backward.
His early infancy was a struggle for life, and his family was
in constant anxiety. At birth he had been too feeble to cry
out; and soon after the christening a three-day attack of
cholera-infantum was almost enough to still for ever the little
heart set pumping, in the first place, with such difficulty.
But he survived; and good Dr. Grabow did his best, by the
most painstaking care and nourishment, to strengthen him for
the difficult period of teething. The first tiny white point
had barely pricked through the gum, when the child was
attacked by convulsions, which repeated themselves with
greater and greater violence, until again the worst was to be
feared. Once more the old doctor speechlessly pressed the
parents’ hands. The child lay in profound exhaustion, and
the vacant look in the shadowy eyes indicated an affection of
the brain. The end seemed almost to be wished for.</p>

<p>But Hanno regained some little strength, consciousness
returned; and though the crisis which he had survived
greatly hindered his progress in walking and talking, there
was no longer any immediate danger to be feared.</p>

<p>The child was slender of limb, and rather tall for his
age. His hair, pale brown and very soft, began to grow
rapidly, and fell waving over the shoulders of his full,
pinafore-like frocks. The family likenesses were abundantly
clear, even now. From the first he possessed the Buddenbrook
hand, broad, a little too short, but finely articulated,
and his nose was precisely the nose of his father and great-grandfather,
though the nostrils would probably remain
more delicate. But the whole lower part of his face, longish
and narrow, was neither Buddenbrook nor Kröger, but from
the mother’s side of the house. This was true of the mouth in
particular, which, when closed, began very early to wear an
anxious, woebegone expression that later matched the look of
his strange, gold-brown, blue-shadowed eyes.</p>

<p>So he began to live: brooded over by his father’s reserved
tenderness, clothed and nurtured under his mother’s watchful
eye; prayed over by Aunt Antonie, presented with tops and
hobby-horses by the Frau Consul and Uncle Justus; and when
his charming little perambulator appeared on the streets, it
was looked after with interest and expectation. Madame
Decho, the stately nurse, had attended the child up to now;
but it had been settled that when they moved into the new
house, not she, but Ida Jungmann, should move in with them,
and the latter’s place with the old Frau Consul be filled by
somebody else.</p>

<p>Senator Buddenbrook carried out his plans. He had no
difficulty in obtaining title to the property in Fishers’ Lane.
The Broad Street house was turned over to Gosch the
broker, who dramatically declared himself prepared to assume
the task of disposing of it. Stephan Kistenmaker, who had
a growing family, and, with his brother Eduard, made good
money in the wine business, bought it at once. Herr Voigt
undertook the new building, and soon there was a clean plan
to unroll before the eyes of the family on Thursday afternoons,
when they could, in fancy, see the façade already
before them: an imposing brick façade with sandstone
caryatides supporting the bow-window, and a flat roof, of
which Clothilde remarked, in her pleasant drawl, that one
might drink afternoon coffee there. The Senator planned to
transfer the business offices to his new building, which would,
of course, leave empty the ground floor of the house in Meng
Street. But here also things turned out well: for it appeared
that the City Fire Insurance Company wanted to rent the
rooms by the month for their offices—which was quickly
arranged.</p>

<p>Autumn came, and the grey walls crumbled to heaps of
rubbish, and Thomas Buddenbrook’s new house rose above
its roomy cellars, while winter set in and slowly waned
again. In all the town there was no pleasanter topic of conversation.
It was “tip-top”—it was the finest dwelling-house
far and wide. But it must cost like the deuce—the old Consul
would never have spent money so recklessly. Thus the
neighbours, the middle-class dwellers in the gabled houses,
looking out at the workmen on the scaffoldings, enjoying the
sight of the rising walls, and speculating on the date of the
carpenters’ feast.</p>

<p>It came at length, and was celebrated with due circumstance.
Up on the flat-topped roof an old master mason made
the festal speech and flung the champagne bottle over his
shoulder, while the tremendous wreath, woven of roses, green
garlands, and gay-coloured leaves, swayed between standards,
heavily in the breeze. The workmen’s feast was held at a
neighbouring inn, at long tables, with beer, sandwiches, and
cigars; and Senator Buddenbrook and his wife and his little
son on Madame Decho’s arm, walked through the narrow
space between the tables and bowed his thanks at the cheers
they gave him.</p>

<p>When they got outside, they put little Hanno back into
his carriage, and Thomas and Gerda crossed the road to have
another look at the red façade with the white caryatides.
They stood before the flower-shop with the narrow door and
the poor little show-window, in which only a few pots of
onions stood on a green glass slab. Iwersen, the proprietor,
a blond giant of a man, in a woollen jacket, was in the
doorway with his wife. She was of a quite different build,
slender and delicate, with a dark, southern-looking face.
She held a four- or five-year-old boy by one hand, while
with the other she was pushing a little carriage back and forth,
in which a younger child lay asleep; and she was plainly
expecting a third blessing.</p>

<p>Iwersen made a low, awkward bow; his wife, continuing
to push the little carriage back and forth, looked calmly and
observantly at the Frau Senator with her narrow black eyes,
as the lady approached them on her husband’s arm.</p>

<p>Thomas paused and pointed with his walking-stick at the
great garland far above them.</p>

<p>“You did a good job, Iwersen,” said he.</p>

<p>“No, Herr Sen’tor. That’s the wife’s work. She’s the
one fer these affairs.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” said the Senator, raised his head with a little jerk,
and gave, for a second, a clear friendly look straight into
Frau Iwersen’s face. Then, without adding a word, he
courteously waved his hand, and they moved on their way.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">One</span> Sunday at the beginning of July—Senator Buddenbrook
had moved some four weeks before—Frau Permaneder
appeared at her brother’s house toward evening. She crossed
the cool ground floor, paved with flags and decorated with
reliefs by Thorwaldsen, whence there was a door leading into
the bureau; she rang at the vestibule door—it could be
opened from the kitchen by pressing on a rubber bulb—and
entered the spacious lobby, where, at the foot of the steps,
stood the bear presented by Tiburtius and Clara. Here she
learned from Anton that the Senator was still at work.</p>

<p>“Very good, Anton,” she said. “I will go to him.”</p>

<p>Yet she did not go at once into the office, but passed the
door that led into it and stood at the bottom of the splendid
staircase, which as far as the first storey had a cast-iron
balustrade, but at the distance of the second storey became a
wide pillared balcony in white and gold, with a great gilt
chandelier hanging down from the skylight’s dizzy height.</p>

<p>“Very elegant,” said Frau Permaneder, softly, in a tone of
great satisfaction, gazing up into this spacious magnificence.
To her it meant, quite simply, the power, the brilliance, and
the triumph of the Buddenbrook family. But now it occurred
to her that she was not, in fact, come upon a very cheerful
errand, and she slowly turned away and passed through the
door into the office.</p>

<p>Thomas sat there quite alone, in his place by the window,
writing a letter. He glanced up, raised an eyebrow, and put
out his hand to his sister.</p>

<p>“’Evening, Tony. What’s the good word?”</p>

<p>“Oh, nothing very good, Tom. Oh, your staircase—it’s
just <i>too</i> splendid! Why are you sitting here writing in the
dark?”</p>

<p>“It was a pressing letter. Well—nothing very good, eh?
Come into the garden, a little. It is pleasanter out there.”</p>

<p>As they crossed the entry, a violin adagio came trillingly
down from the storey above.</p>

<p>“Listen,” said Tony, and paused a moment. “Gerda is
playing. How heavenly! What a woman! She isn’t a
woman, she’s a fairy. How is Hanno, Tom?”</p>

<p>“Just having his supper, with Jungmann. Too bad he
is so slow about walking—”</p>

<p>“Oh, that will come, Tom, that will come. Are you pleased
with Ida?”</p>

<p>“Why not?”</p>

<p>They crossed the flags at the back, leaving the kitchen on
the right, went through a glass door and up two steps into the
lovely, scented flower-garden.</p>

<p>“Well?” the Senator asked.</p>

<p>It was warm and still. The fragrance from the neat beds
and borders hung in the evening air, and the fountain, surrounded
by tall pale purple iris, sent its stream gently
plashing heavenward, where the first stars began to gleam.
In the background, an open flight of steps flanked by low
obelisks, led up to a gravelled terrace, with an open wooden
pavilion, a closed marquee, and some garden chairs. On the
left hand was the property wall between them and the next
garden; on the right the side-wall of the next house was
covered with a wooden trellis intended for climbing plants.
There were a few currant and gooseberry bushes at the sides
of the terrace steps, but there was only one tree, a large,
gnarled walnut by the left-hand wall.</p>

<p>“The thing is this,” answered Frau Permaneder, with some
hesitation, as the brother and sister began to pace the gravel
path of the fore part of the garden. “Tiburtius has
written—”</p>

<p>“Clara?” questioned Thomas. “Please don’t make a long
story of it.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom. She is in bed; she is very bad—the doctor is
afraid of tuberculosis—of the brain.—I can hardly speak the
words. Here is the letter Tiburtius wrote me, and enclosed
another for Mother, which we are to give her when we have
prepared her a little. It tells the same story. And there is
this second enclosure, to Mother, from Clara herself—written
in pencil, in a shaky hand. And Tiburtius wrote that
she herself said they were the last she should write, for it
seems the sad thing is she makes no effort to live. She was
always longing for Heaven—” finished Frau Permaneder, and
wiped her eyes.</p>

<p>The Senator walked at her side, his hands behind his back,
his head bowed.</p>

<p>“You are so quiet, Tom. But you are right—what is there
to say? Just now, too, when Christian lies ill in Hamburg—”</p>

<p>For this was, in fact, the state of things. Christian’s “misery”
in the left side had increased so much of late that it had
become actual pain, severe enough to make him forget all
smaller woes. He was quite helpless, and had written to his
mother from London that he was coming home, for her to take
care of him. He quit his situation in London and started off;
but at Hamburg had been obliged to take to his bed; the
doctor diagnosed his ailment as rheumatism of the joints,
and he had been removed from his hotel to a hospital. Any
further journey was for the time impossible. There he lay,
and dictated to his attendant letters that betrayed extreme
depression.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said the Senator, quietly. “It seems as if one thing
just followed on another.”</p>

<p>She put her arm for an instant across his shoulders.</p>

<p>“But <i>you</i> musn’t give way, Tom. This is no time for you
to be down-hearted. You need all your courage—”</p>

<p>“Yes, God knows I need it.”</p>

<p>“What do you mean, Tom? Tell me, why were you so
quiet Thursday afternoon at dinner, if I may ask?”</p>

<p>“Oh—business, my child. I had to sell no very small
quantity of grain not very advantageously—or, rather, I had
to sell a large quantity very much at a loss.”</p>

<p>“Well, that happens, Tom. You sell at a loss to-day, and
to-morrow you make it good again. To get discouraged over
a thing of that kind—”</p>

<p>“Wrong, Tony,” he said, and shook his head. “My courage
does not go down to zero because I have a piece of bad
luck. It’s the other way on. I believe in that, and events
show it.”</p>

<p>“But what is the matter with it, then?” she asked, surprised
and alarmed. “One would think you have enough to make
you happy, Tom. Clara is alive, and with God’s help she
will get better. And as for everything else—here we are,
walking about, in your own garden, and it all smells so sweet—and
yonder is your house, a dream of a house—Hermann
Hagenström’s is a dog-kennel beside it! And you have done
all that—”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is almost too beautiful, Tony. I’ll tell you—it is
too new. It jars on me a little—perhaps that is what is the
matter with me. It may be responsible for the bad mood
that comes over me and spoils everything. I looked forward
immensely to all this; but the anticipation was the best part
of it—it always is. Everything gets done too slowly—so
when it is finished the pleasure is already gone.”</p>

<p>“The pleasure is gone, Tom? At your age?”</p>

<p>“A man is as young, or as old, as he feels. And when one
gets one’s wish too late, or works too hard for it, it comes
already weighted with all sorts of small vexatious drawbacks—with
all the dust of reality upon it, that one did not reckon
with in fancy. It is so irritating—so <i>irritating</i>—”</p>

<p>“Oh yes.—But what do you mean by ‘as old as you feel’?”</p>

<p>“Why, Tony—it is a mood, certainly. It may pass. But
just now I feel older than I am. I have business cares. And
at the Directors’ meeting of the Buchen Railway yesterday,
Consul Hagenström simply talked me down, refuted my contentions,
nearly made me appear ridiculous. I feel that
could not have happened to me before. It is as though something
had begun to slip—as though I haven’t the firm grip I
had on events.—What is success? It is an inner, an indescribable
force, resourcefulness, power of vision; a consciousness
that I am, by my mere existence, exerting pressure
on the movement of life about me. It is my belief in the
adaptability of life to my own ends. Fortune and success lie
with ourselves. We must hold them firmly—deep within
us. For as soon as something begins to slip, to relax, to get
tired, <i>within us</i>, then everything without us will rebel and
struggle to withdraw from our influence. One thing follows
another, blow after blow—and the man is finished. Often
and often, in these days, I have thought of a Turkish proverb;
it says, ‘When the house is finished, death comes.’ It doesn’t
need to be death. But the decline, the falling-off, the beginning
of the end. You know, Tony,” he went on, in a still lower
voice, putting his arm underneath his sister’s, “when Hanno
was christened, you said: ‘It looks as if quite a new life
would dawn for us all!’ I can still hear you say it, and I
thought then that you were right, for I was elected Senator,
and was fortunate in my business, and this house seemed to
spring up out of the ground. But the ‘Senator’ and this house
are superficial after all. I know, from life and from history,
something you have not thought of: often, the outward and
visible material signs and symbols of happiness and success
only show themselves when the process of decline has already
set in. The outer manifestations take time—like the light of
that star up there, which may in reality be already quenched,
when it looks to us to be shining its brightest.”</p>

<p>He ceased to speak, and they walked for a while in silence,
while the fountain gently murmured, and a whispering
sounded from the top of the walnut tree. Then Frau Permaneder
breathed such a heavy sigh that it sounded like a sob.</p>

<p>“How sadly you talk, Tom. You never spoke so sadly
before. But it is good to speak out, and it will help you to
put all that kind of thoughts out of your mind.”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tony, I must try to do that, I know, as well as I can.
And now give me the enclosures from Clara and the Pastor.
It will be best, won’t it, for me to take over the matter, and
speak to-morrow morning with Mother? Poor Mother! If
it is really tuberculosis, one may as well give up hope.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">You</span> don’t even ask me? You go right over my head?”</p>

<p>“I have done as I had to do.”</p>

<p>“You have acted like a distracted person, in a perfectly
unreasonable way.”</p>

<p>“Reason is not the highest thing on earth.”</p>

<p>“Please don’t make phrases. The question is one of the
most ordinary justice, which you have most astonishingly
ignored.”</p>

<p>“Let me suggest to you, my son, that you yourself are ignoring
the duty and respect which you owe to your mother.”</p>

<p>“And I answer you, my dear Mother, by telling you that I
have never for a moment forgotten the respect I owe you; but
that my attributes as a son became void when I took my
father’s place as head of the family and of the firm.”</p>

<p>“I desire you to be silent, Thomas!”</p>

<p>“No, I will not be silent, so long as you fail to realize the
extent of your own weakness and folly.”</p>

<p>“I have a right to dispose of my own property as I choose!”</p>

<p>“Within the limits of justice and reason.”</p>

<p>“I could never have believed you would have the heart to
wound me like this!”</p>

<p>“And I could never have believed that my own Mother
would slap me in the face!”</p>

<p>“Tom! Why, Tom!” Frau Permaneder’s anguished voice
got itself a hearing at last. She sat at the window of the
landscape-room, wringing her hands, while her brother paced
up and down in a state of high excitement, and the Frau Consul,
beside herself with angry grief, sat on the sofa, leaning
with one hand on its upholstered arm, while the other struck
the table to emphasize her words. All three wore mourning
for Clara, who was now no longer of this earth; and all three
were pale and excited.</p>

<p>What was going on? Something amazing, something
dreadful, something at which the very actors in the scene
themselves stood aghast and incredulous. A quarrel, an embittered
disagreement between mother and son!</p>

<p>It was a sultry August afternoon. Only ten days after the
Senator had gently prepared his mother and given her the
letters from Clara and Tiburtius, the blow fell, and he had
the harder task of breaking to the old lady the news of death
itself. He travelled to Riga for the funeral, and returned
with his brother-in-law, who spent a few days with the family
of his deceased wife, and also visited Christian in the hospital
at Hamburg. And now, two days after the Pastor had departed
for home, the Frau Consul, with obvious hesitation,
made a certain revelation to her son.</p>

<p>“One hundred and twenty-seven thousand, five hundred
marks current,” cried he, and shook his clasped hands in front
of him. “If it were the dowry, even! If he wanted to keep
the eighty thousand marks! Though, considering there’s no
heir, even that—! But to promise him Clara’s whole inheritance,
right over my head! Without saying aye, yes, or no!”</p>

<p>“Thomas, for our blessed Lord’s sake, do me some sort of
justice, at least. Could I act otherwise? Tell me, could I?
She who has been taken from us, and is now with God, she
wrote me from her death-bed, with faltering hand, a pencilled
letter. ‘Mother,’ she wrote, ‘we shall see each other no
more on this earth, and these are, I know, my dying words to
you. With my last conscious thoughts, I appeal to you for
my husband. God gave us no children; but when you follow
me, let what would have been mine if I had lived go to him to
enjoy during his lifetime. Mother, it is my last request—my
dying prayer. You will not refuse it.’—No, Thomas, I
did not refuse it—I could not. I sent a dispatch to her, and
she died in peace.” The Frau Consul wept violently.</p>

<p>“And you never told me a syllable. Everybody conceals
things from me, and acts without my authority,” repeated the
Senator.</p>

<p>“Yes, Thomas, I have kept silent. For I felt I <i>must</i> fulfil
the last wish of my dying child, and I knew you would have
tried to prevent me!”</p>

<p>“Yes! By God, I would have!”</p>

<p>“You would have had no right to, for three of my children
would have been on my side.”</p>

<p>“I think my opinion has enough weight to balance that of
two women and a degenerate fool.”</p>

<p>“You speak of your brother and sisters as heartlessly as
you do to me.”</p>

<p>“Clara was a pious, ignorant woman, Mother. And Tony
is a child—and, anyhow, she knew nothing about the affair at
all until now—or she might have talked at the wrong time,
eh? And Christian? Oh, he got Christian’s consent, did
Tibertius! Who would have thought it of him? Do you
know now, or don’t you grasp it yet—what he is, this ingenious
pastor? He is a rogue, and a fortune-hunter!”</p>

<p>“Sons-in-law are always rogues,” said Frau Permaneder,
in a hollow voice.</p>

<p>“He is a fortune-hunter! What does he do? He travels
to Hamburg, and sits down by Christian’s bed. He talks to
him—‘Yes,’ says Christian, ‘yes, Tibertius, God bless you!
Have you any idea of the pain I suffer in my left side?’—Oh,
the idiots, the scoundrels! They joined hands against me!”
And the Senator, perfectly beside himself, leaned against the
wrought-iron fire-screen and pressed his clenched hands to
his temples.</p>

<p>This paroxysm of anger was out of proportion to the circumstances.
No, it was not the hundred and twenty-seven
thousand marks that had brought him to this unprecedented
state of rage. It was rather that his irritated senses connected
this case with the series of rebuffs and misfortunes
which had lately attended him in both public and private
business. Nothing went well any more. Nothing turned out
as he intended it should. And now, had it come to this, that
in the house of his fathers they “went over his head” in matters
of the highest importance? That a pastor from Riga
could thus bamboozle him behind his back? He could have
prevented it if he had only been told! But events had taken
their course without him. It was this which he felt could
not have happened earlier—would not have dared to happen
earlier! Again his faith tottered—his faith in himself, his
luck, his power, his future. And it was nothing but his own
inward weakness and despair that broke out in this scene before
mother and sister.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder stood up and embraced her brother.
“Tom,” she said, “do control yourself. Try to be calm.
You will make yourself ill. Are things so very bad? Tibertius
doesn’t need to live so very long, perhaps, and the money
would come back after he dies. And if you want it to, it can
be altered—can it not be altered, Mamma?”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul answered only with sobs.</p>

<p>“Oh, no, no,” said the Consul, pulling himself together,
and making a weak gesture of dissent. “Let it be as it is.
Do you think I would carry it into court and sue my own
mother, and add a public scandal to the family one? It may
go as it is,” he concluded, and walked lifelessly to the glass
door, where he paused and stood.</p>

<p>“But you need not imagine,” he said in a suppressed voice,
“that things are going so brilliantly with us. Tony lost eighty
thousand marks, and Christian, beside the setting up of fifty
thousand that he has run through with, has already had
thirty thousand in advance, and will need more, as he is not
earning anything, and will have to take a cure at Öynhausen.
And now Clara’s dowry is permanently lost, and her whole
inheritance besides for an indefinite period. And business is
poor; it seems to have gone to the devil precisely since the
time when I spent more than a hundred thousand marks on my
house. No, things are not going well in a family where there
are such scenes as this to-day. Let me tell you one thing; if
Father were alive, if he were here in this room, he would fold
his hands and commend us to the mercy of God.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Wars</span> and rumours of war, billeting and bustle! Prussian
officers tread the parquetry floors of Senator Buddenbrook’s
bel-étage, kiss the hand of the lady of the house, and frequent
the club with Christian, who is back from Öynhausen. In
Meng Street Mamsell Severin, Riekchen Severin, the Frau
Consul’s new companion, helps the maids to drag piles of
mattresses into the old garden-house, which is full of soldiers.</p>

<p>Confusion, disorder, and suspense reign. Troops march off
through the gate, new ones come in. They overrun the
town; they eat, sleep, fill the ears of the citizens with the
noise of rolling drums, commands, and trumpet calls—and
march off again. Royal princes are fêted, entry follows
entry. Then quiet again—and suspense.</p>

<p>In the late autumn and winter the victorious troops return.
Again they are billeted in the town for a time, are mustered
out and go home—to the great relief of the cheering citizens.
Peace comes—the brief peace, heavy with destiny, of the
year 1865.</p>

<p>And between two wars, little Johann played. Unconscious
and tranquil, with his soft curling hair and voluminous
pinafore frocks, he played in the garden by the fountain, or
in the little gallery partitioned off for his use by a pillared
railing from the vestibule of the second storey—played the
plays of his four and a half years—those plays whose meaning
and charm no grown person can possibly grasp: which need
no more than a few pebbles, or a stick of wood with a dandelion
for a helmet, since they command the pure, powerful,
glowing, untaught and unintimidated fancy of those blissful
years before life touches us, when neither duty nor remorse
dares to lay upon us a finger’s weight, when we may see, hear,
laugh, dream, and feel amazement, when the world yet makes
upon us not one single demand; when the impatience of those
whom we should like so much to love does not yet torment us
for evidence of our ability to succeed in the impending struggle.
Ah, only a little while, and that struggle will be upon
us—and they will do their best to bend us to their will and
cut us to their pattern, to exercise us, to lengthen us, to shorten
us, to corrupt us....</p>

<p>Great things happened while little Hanno played. The
war flamed up, and its fortunes swayed this way and that,
then inclined to the side of the victors; and Hanno Buddenbrook’s
native city, which had shrewdly stuck to Prussia,
looked on not without satisfaction at wealthy Frankfort,
which had to pay with her independence for her faith in
Austria.</p>

<p>But with the failure in July of a large firm of Frankfort
wholesale dealers, immediately before the armistice, the firm
of Johann Buddenbrook lost at one fell sweep the round sum
of twenty thousand thaler.</p>

<p></p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak" id="PART_EIGHT">PART EIGHT</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">When</span> Herr Hugo Weinschenk—in his buttoned-up frock-coat,
with his drooping lower lip and his narrow black moustaches,
which grew, in the most masculine way imaginable,
right into the corners of his mouth; with both his fists held out
in front of him, and making little motions with his elbows
at about the height of his waist—when Herr Hugo Weinschenk,
now for some time Director of the City Fire Insurance
Company, crossed the great entry in Meng Street and passed,
with a swinging, pompous stride, from his front to his back
office, he gave an impressive impersonation of an energetic
and prosperous man.</p>

<p>And Erica Grünlich, on the other hand, was now twenty
years old: a tall, blooming girl, fresh-coloured and pretty,
full of health and strength. If chance took her up or down
the stairs just as Herr Weinschenk passed that way—and
chance did this not seldom—the Director took off his top-hat,
displaying his short black hair, which was already greying
at the temples, minced rather more than ever at the waist of
his frock-coat, and greeted the young girl with an admiring
glance from his bold and roving brown eye. Whereat Erica
ran away, sat down somewhere in a window, and wept for
hours out of sheer helpless confusion.</p>

<p>Fräulein Grünlich had grown up under Therese Weichbrodt’s
care and correction: her thoughts did not fly far
afield. She wept over Herr Weinschenk’s top-hat, the way
he raised his eyebrows at sight of her and let them fall; over
his regal bearing and his balancing fists. Her mother, Frau
Permaneder, saw further.</p>

<p>Her daughter’s future had troubled her for years; for
Erica was at a disadvantage compared with other young girls
of her age. Frau Permaneder not only did not go into society,
she was actually at war with it. The conviction that the
“best people” thought slightingly of her because of her two
divorces, had become almost a fixed idea; and she read contempt
and aversion where probably there was only indifference.
Consul Hermann Hagenström, for instance, simple and
liberal-minded man that he was, would very likely have been
perfectly glad to greet her on the street; his money had only
increased his joviality and good nature. But she stared, with
her head flung back, past his “goose-liver-paté” face, which,
to use her own strong language, she “hated like the plague”—and
her look, of course, distinctly forbade him. So Erica
grew up outside her uncle’s social circle; she frequented
no balls, and had small chance of meeting eligible young
gentlemen.</p>

<p>Yet it was Frau Antonie’s most ardent hope, especially
after she herself had “failed in business,” as she said, that
her daughter might realize her own unfulfilled dream of a
happy and advantageous marriage, which should redound to
the glory of the family and sink the mother’s failure in final
oblivion. Tony longed for this beyond everything, and
chiefly now for her brother’s sake, who had latterly shown
so little optimism, as a sign to him that the luck of the family
was not yet lost, that they were by no means “at the end of
their rope.” Her second dowry, the eighteen thousand thaler
so magnanimously returned by Herr Permaneder, lay waiting
for Erica; and directly Frau Antonie’s practiced glance
marked the budding tenderness between her daughter and the
Director, she began to trouble Heaven with a prayer that
Herr Weinschenk might be led to visit them.</p>

<p>He was. He appeared in the first storey, where he was
received by the three ladies, mother, daughter, and granddaughter,
talked for ten minutes, and promised to return another
day for coffee and more leisurely conversation.</p>

<p>This too came to pass, and the acquaintance progressed.
The Director was a Silesian by birth. His old father, in
fact, still lived in Silesia; but the family seemed not to come
into consideration, Hugo being, evidently, a “self-made man.”
He had the self-consciousness of such men: a not quite native,
rather insecure, mistrustful, exaggerated air. His grammar
was not perfect, and his conversation was distinctly clumsy.
And his countrified frock-coat had shiny spots; his cuffs,
with large jet cuff-buttons, were not quite fresh; and the nail
on the middle finger of his left hand had been crushed in
some accident, and was shrivelled and blackened. The impression,
on the whole, was rather unpleasing; yet it did not
prevent Hugo Weinschenk from being a highly worthy young
man, industrious and energetic, with a yearly salary of
twelve thousand marks current; nor from being, in Erica
Grünlich’s eyes, handsome to boot.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder quickly looked him over and summed
him up. She talked freely with her mother and the Senator.
It was clear to her that here was a case of two interests
meeting and complementing each other. Director Weinschenk
was, like Erica, devoid of every social connection: the two
were thus, in a manner, marked out for each other—it was
plainly the hand of God himself. If the Director, who was
nearing the forties, his hair already sprinkled with grey,
desired to found a family appropriate to his station and
connections, here was an opening for him into one of the
best circles in town, calculated to advance him in his calling
and consolidate his position. As for Erica’s welfare, Frau
Permaneder could feel confident that at least her own lot
would be out of the question. Herr Weinschenk had not the
faintest resemblance to Herr Permaneder; and he was differentiated
from Bendix Grünlich by his position as an old-established
official with a fixed salary—which, of course, did
not preclude a further career.</p>

<p>In a word, much good will was shown on both sides. Herr
Weinschenk’s visits followed each other in quick succession,
and by January—January of the year 1867—he permitted
himself to make a brief and manly offer for Erica Grünlich’s
hand.</p>

<p>From now on he belonged to the family. He came on
children’s day, and was received civilly by the relatives of
his betrothed. He must soon have seen that he did not fit
in very well; but he concealed the fact under an increased
assurance of manner, while the Frau Consul, Uncle Justus,
and the Senator—though hardly the Broad Street Buddenbrooks—practised
a tactful complaisance toward the socially
awkward, hard-working official.</p>

<p>And tact was needed. For pauses would come at the family
table, when Director Weinschenk tried to make conversation
by asking if “orange marmalade” was a “pudden”; when he
gave out the opinion that Romeo and Juliet was a piece by
Schiller; when his manner with Erica’s cheek or arm became
too roguish. He uttered his views frankly and cheerfully,
rubbing his hands like a man whose mind is free from care,
and leaning back sidewise against the arm of his chair.
Some one always needed to fill in the pause by a sprightly
or diverting remark.</p>

<p>He got on best with the Senator, who knew how to steer
a safe course between politics and business. His relations
with Gerda Buddenbrook were hopeless. This lady’s personality
put him off to such a degree that he was incapable of
finding anything to talk about with her for two minutes on
end. The fact that she played the violin made a strong impression
upon him; and he finally confined himself, on each
Thursday afternoon encounter, to the jovial enquiry, “Well,
how’s the fiddle?” After the third time, however, the Frau
Senator refrained from reply.</p>

<p>Christian, on the other hand, used to look at his new relative
down his nose, and the next day imitate him and his conversation
with full details. The second son of the deceased
Consul Buddenbrook had been relieved of his rheumatism
in Öynhausen; but a certain stiffness of the joints was left,
as well as the periodic misery in the left side, where all the
nerves were too short, and sundry other ills to which he was
heir, as difficulty in breathing and swallowing, irregularity
of the heart action, and a tendency to paralysis—or at least to
a fear of it. He did not look like a man at the end of the
thirties. His head was entirely bald except for vestiges of
reddish hair at the back of the neck and on the temples; and
his small round roving eyes lay deeper than ever in their
sockets. And his great bony nose and his lean, sallow cheeks
were startlingly prominent above his heavy drooping red
moustaches. His trousers, of beautiful and lasting English
stuff, flapped about his crooked emaciated legs.</p>

<p>He had come back once more to his mother’s house, and
had a room on the corridor of the first storey. But he spent
more of his time at the club than in Meng Street, for life there
was not made any too pleasant for him. Riekchen Severin,
Ida Jungmann’s successor, who now reigned over the Frau
Consul’s household and managed the servants, had a peasant’s
instinct for hard facts. She was a thick-set country-bred
creature, with coarse lips and fat red cheeks. She perceived
directly that it was not worth while to put herself out for this
idle story-teller, who was silly and ill by turns, whom his
brother, the Senator—the real head of the family—ignored
with lifted eyebrows. So she quite calmly neglected
Christian’s wants. “Gracious, Herr Buddenbrook,” she would
say, “you needn’t think as I’ve got time for the likes of
you!” Christian would look at her with his nose all
wrinkled up, as if to say “Aren’t you ashamed of yourself?”
and go his stiff-kneed way.</p>

<p>“Do you think,” he said to Tony, “that I have a candle
to go to bed by? Very seldom. I generally take a match.”
The sum his mother could allow him was small. “Hard
times,” he would say. “Yes, things were different once.
Why, what do you suppose? Sometimes I’ve had to borrow
money for tooth-powder!”</p>

<p>“Christian!” cried Frau Permaneder. “How undignified!
And going to bed with a match!” She was shocked and
outraged in her deepest sensibilities—but that did not mend
matters.</p>

<p>The tooth-powder money Christian borrowed from his old
friend Andreas Gieseke, Doctor of Civil and Criminal Jurisprudence.
He was fortunate in this friendship, and it did
him credit; for Dr. Gieseke, though as much of a rake as
Christian, knew how to keep his dignity. He had been
elected Senator the preceding winter, for Dr. Överdieck had
sunk gently to his long rest, and Dr. Langhals sat in his
place. His elevation did not affect Andreas Gieseke’s mode
of life. Since his marriage with Fräulein Huneus, he had
acquired a spacious house in the centre of the town; but as
everybody knew, he also owned a certain comfortable little
vine-clad villa in the suburb of St. Gertrude, which was charmingly
furnished, and occupied quite alone by a still young and
uncommonly pretty person of unknown origin. Above the
house door, in ornamental gilt lettering, was the word
“Quisisana,” by which name the retired little dwelling was
known throughout the town, where they pronounced it with
a very soft <i>s</i> and a very broad <i>a</i>. Christian Buddenbrook,
as Senator Gieseke’s best friend, had obtained entry into
Quisisana, and been successful there, as formerly with Aline
Puvogel in Hamburg, and on other occasions in London,
Valparaiso, and sundry other parts of the world. He “told
a few stories,” and was “a little friendly”; and now he visited
the little vine-clad house on the same footing as Senator
Gieseke himself. Whether this happened with the latter’s
knowledge and consent, is of course doubtful. What is
certain is, that Christian found there, without money and
without price, the same friendly relaxation as Dr. Gieseke,
who, however, had to pay for the same with his wife’s money.</p>

<p>A short time after the betrothal of Hugo Weinschenk and
Erica Grünlich, the Director proposed to his relative that he
should enter the Insurance office; and Christian actually
worked for two weeks in the service of the Company. But
the misery in his side began to get worse, and his other, indefinable
ills as well; and the Director proved to be a
domineering superior, who did not hesitate, on the occasion
of a little misunderstanding, to call his relative a booby.
So Christian felt constrained to leave this post too.</p>

<p>Madame Permaneder, at this period of the family’s history,
was in such a joyful mood that her happiness found vent in
shrewd observations about life: how, when all was said and
done, it had its good side. Truly, she bloomed anew in these
weeks; and their invigorating activity, the manifold plans,
the search for suitable quarters, and the feverish preoccupation
with furnishings brought back with such force the
memories of her first betrothal that she could not but feel
young again—young and boundlessly hopeful. Much of the
graceful high spirits of girlhood returned to her ways, and
movements; indeed, she profaned the mood of one entire
Jerusalem evening by such uncontrollable hilarity that even
Lea Gerhardt let the book of her ancestor fall in her lap
and stared about the room with the great, innocent, startled
eyes of the deaf.</p>

<p>Erica was not to be parted from her mother. The Director
agreed—nay, it was even his wish,—that Frau Antonie
should live with the Weinschenks, at least at first, and help
the inexperienced Erica with her housekeeping. And it was
precisely this which called up in her the most priceless
feeling, as though no Bendix Grünlich or Alois Permaneder
had ever existed, and all the trials, disappointments, and
sufferings of her life were as nothing, and she might begin
anew and with fresh hopes. She bade Erica be grateful to
God, who bestowed upon her the one man of her desire,
whereas the mother had been obliged to offer up her first and
dearest choice on the altar of duty and reason. It was
Erica’s name which, with a hand trembling with joy, she inscribed
in the family book next the Director’s. But she,
Tony Buddenbrook, was the real bride. It was she who might
once more ransack furniture and upholstery shops and test
hangings and carpets with a practised hand; she who once
more found and rented a truly “elegant” apartment. It was
she who was once more to leave the pious and roomy parental
mansion and cease to be a divorced wife; she who might once
more lift her head and begin a new life, calculated to arouse
general remark and enhance the prestige of the family. Even—was
it a dream?—dressing-gowns appeared upon the
horizon: two dressing-gowns, for Erica and herself, of soft,
woven stuff, with close rows of velvet trimming from neck to
hem!</p>

<p>The weeks fled by—the last weeks of Erica Grünlich’s
maidenhood. The young pair had made calls in only a few
houses; for the Director, a serious and preoccupied man, with
no social experience, intended to devote what leisure he had
to intimate domesticity. There was a betrothal dinner in the
great salon of the house in Fishers’ Lane, at which, besides
Thomas and Gerda, there were present the bridal pair and
Henriette, Friederike and Pfiffi Buddenbrook, and some close
friends of the Senator; and the Director continually pinched
the bare shoulders of his fiancée, rather to the disgust of
the other guests. And the wedding day drew near.</p>

<p>The marriage was solemnized in the columned hall, as on
that other occasion when it was Frau Grünlich who wore the
myrtle. Frau Stuht from Bell-Founders’ Street, the same
who moved in the best circles, helped to arrange the folds of
the bride’s white satin gown and pin on the decorations.
The Senator gave away the bride, supported by Christian’s
friend Senator Gieseke, and two school friends of Erica’s
acted as bridesmaids. Director Hugo Weinschenk looked
imposing and manly, and only trod once on Erica’s flowing
veil on the way to the improvised altar. Pastor Pringsheim
held his hands clasped beneath his chin, and performed the
service with his accustomed air of sweet exaltation; and
everything went off with dignity and according to rule. When
the rings were exchanged, and the deep and the treble “yes”
sounded in the hush (both a trifle husky), Frau Permaneder,
overpowered by the past, the present, and the future, burst
into audible sobs: just the unthinking, unembarrassed tears
of her childhood. And the sisters Buddenbrook—Pfiffi, in
honour of the day, was wearing a gold chain to her pince-nez—smiled
a little sourly, as always on such occasions. But
Mademoiselle Weichbrodt, who had grown shorter with the
lengthening years, and had the oval brooch with the miniature
of her mother around her thin neck—Sesemi said, with the
disproportionate solemnity which hides deep emotion: “Be
happy, you good che-ild!”</p>

<p>Followed a banquet, as solemn as solid, beneath the
eyes of the white Olympians, looking down composedly from
their blue background. As it drew toward its end, the newly
wedded pair disappeared, to begin their wedding journey,
which was to include visits to several large cities. All this
was at the middle of April; and in the next two weeks, Frau
Permaneder, assisted by the upholsterer Jacobs, accomplished
one of her masterpieces: she moved into and settled the
spacious first storey which she had rented in a house half-way
down Baker Alley. There, in a bower of flowers, she
welcomed the married pair on their return.</p>

<p>And thus began Tony Buddenbrook’s third marriage.</p>

<p>Yes, this was really the right way to put it. The Senator
himself, one Thursday afternoon when the Weinschenks were
not present, had called it that, and Frau Permaneder quite
relished the joke. All the cares of the new household fell
upon her, but she reaped her reward in pride and pleasure.
One day she happened to meet on the street Frau Consul
Julchen Möllendorpf, born Hagenström, into whose face she
looked with a challenging, triumphant glance; it actually
dawned upon Frau Möllendorpf that she had better speak
first, and she did. Tony waxed so important in her pride and
joy, when she showed off the new house to visiting relatives,
that little Erica, beside her, seemed but a guest herself.</p>

<p>Frau Antonie displayed the house to their guests, the train
of her morning gown dragging behind her, her shoulders up
and her head thrown back, carrying on her arm the key-basket
with its bow of satin ribbon. She displayed the furniture,
the hangings, the translucent porcelain, the gleaming
silver, the large oil paintings. These last had been purchased
by the Director, and were nearly all still-lifes of edibles or
nude figures of women, for such was Hugo Weinschenk’s taste.
Tony’s every movement seemed to say: “See, I have managed
all this for the third time in my life! It is almost as fine as
Grünlich’s, and much finer than Permaneder’s!”</p>

<p>The old Frau Consul came, in a black-and-grey striped silk,
giving out a discreet odour of patchouli. She surveyed
everything with her pale, calm eyes and, without any loud
expressions of admiration, professed herself pleased with
the effect. The Senator came, with his wife and child; he
and Gerda hugely enjoyed Tony’s blissful self-satisfaction,
and with difficulty prevented her from killing her adored
little Johann with currant bread and port wine. The Misses
Buddenbrook came, and were unanimously of opinion that it
was all very fine—of course, being modest people themselves,
they would not care to live in it. Poor, lean, grey, patient,
hungry Clothilde came, submitted to the usual teasing,
and drank four cups of coffee, praising everything the while,
in her usual friendly drawl. Even Christian appeared now
and then, when there was nobody at the club, drank a little
glass of Benedictine, and talked about a project he had of
opening an agency for champagne and brandy. He knew the
business, and it was a light, agreeable job, in which a man
could be his own master, write now and then in a notebook,
and make thirty thaler by turning over his hand. Then he
borrowed a little money from Frau Permaneder to buy a
bouquet for the leading lady at the theatre; came, by God
knows what train of thought, to Maria and the depravity in
London; and then lighted upon the story of the mangy dog
that travelled all the way from Valparaiso to San Francisco
in a hand-satchel. By this time he was in full swing, and
narrated with such gusto, verve, and irresistible drollery that
he would have held a large audience spell-bound.</p>

<p>He narrated like one inspired; he possessed the gift of
tongues. He narrated in English, Spanish, low German, and
Hamburgese; he depicted stabbing affrays in Chile and pick-pocketings
in Whitechapel. He drew upon his repertory of
comic songs, and half sang, half recited, with incomparable
pantomime and highly suggestive gesture:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“I sauntered out one day,</div>
<div class="verse">In an idle sort o’ way,</div>
<div class="verse">And chanced to see a maid, ahead o’ me.</div>
<div class="indent">She’d such a charmin’ air,</div>
<div class="verse">Her back—was French—I’d swear,</div>
<div class="indent">And she wore her ’at as rakish as could be.</div>
<div class="verse">I says, ‘My pretty dear,</div>
<div class="indent">Since you an’ I are ’ere,</div>
<div class="verse">Perhaps you’d take me arm and walk along?’</div>
<div class="indent">She turned her pretty ’ead,</div>
<div class="indent">And looked—at me—and said,</div>
<div class="verse">‘You just get on, my lad, and hold your tongue!”’</div>
</div></div>

<p>From this he went off on an account of a performance at
the Renz Circus, in Hamburg, and reproduced a turn by a
troupe of English vaudeville artists, in such a way that you
felt you were actually present. There was the usual hubbub
behind the curtain, shouts of “Open the door, will you!”
quarrels with the ring-master; and then, in a broad, lugubrious
English-German, a whole string of stories: the one about
the man who swallowed a mouse in his sleep, and went to
the vet., who advised him to swallow a cat; and the one about
“my grandmother—lively old girl, she was”—who, on her
way to the railway station, encounters all sorts of adventures,
ending with the train pulling out of the station in front of
the nose of the “lively old girl.” And then Christian broke
off with a triumphant “Orchestra!” and made as if he had
just waked up and was very surprised that no music was
forthcoming.</p>

<p>But, quite suddenly, he stopped. His face changed, his
motions relaxed. His little deep round eyes began to stray
moodily about; he rubbed his left side with his hand, and
seemed to be listening to uncanny sounds within himself.
He drank another glass of liqueur, which relieved him a little.
Then he tried to tell another story, but broke down in a fit
of depression.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder, who in these days was uncommonly
prone to laugh and had enjoyed the performance hugely, accompanied
her brother to the door, in rather a prankish mood.
“Adieu, Herr Agent,” said she. “Minnesinger—Ninnysinger!
Old goose! Come again soon!” She laughed
full-throatedly behind him and went back into her house.</p>

<p>But Christian did not mind. He did not even hear her,
so deep was he in thought. “Well,” he said to himself, “I’ll
go over to Quisisana for a bit.” His hat a little awry,
leaning on his stick with the nun’s bust for a handle, he
went slowly and stiffly down the steps.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> the spring of 1868, one evening towards ten o’clock, Frau
Permaneder entered the first story of her brother’s house.
Senator Buddenbrook sat alone in the living-room, which
was done in olive-green rep, with a large round centre-table
and a great gas-lamp hanging down over it from the ceiling.
He had the <i>Berlin Financial Gazette</i> spread out in front of
him on the table, and was reading it, with a cigarette held between
the first and second fingers of his left hand, and a
gold pince-nez on his nose—he had now for some time been
obliged to use glasses for reading. He heard his sister’s
footsteps as she passed through the dining-room, took off his
glasses, and peered into the darkness until Tony appeared
between the portières and in the circle of light from the
lamp.</p>

<p>“Oh, it is you? How are you? Back from Pöppenrade?
How are your friends?”</p>

<p>“Evening, Tom. Thanks, Armgard is very well. Are you
here alone?”</p>

<p>“Yes; I’m glad you have come. I ate my dinner all alone
to-night like the Pope. I don’t count Mamsell Jungmann,
because she is always popping up to look after Hanno.
Gerda is at the Casino. Christian fetched her, to hear Tamayo
play the violin.”</p>

<p>“Bless and save us—as Mother says.—Yes, I’ve noticed
lately that Gerda and Christian get on quite well together.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I have too. Since he came back for good, she seems
to have taken to him. She sits and listens to him when he
tells about his troubles—dear me, I suppose he entertains
her. She said to me lately: ‘There is nothing of the
burgher about Christian, Thomas—he is even less of a
burgher than you are, yourself!’”</p>

<p>“Burgher, Tom? What did she mean? Why, it seems to
me there is no better burgher on top of the earth than you
are!”</p>

<p>“Oh, well—she didn’t mean it just in that sense. Take
off your things and sit down a while, my child. How splendid
you look! The country air did you good.”</p>

<p>“I’m in very good form,” she said, as she took off her
mantle and the hood with lilac silk ribbons and sat down
with dignity in an easy-chair by the table. “My sleep and
my digestion both improved very much in this short time.
The fresh milk, and the farm sausages and hams—one thrives
like the cattle and the crops. And the honey, Tom, I have
always considered honey one of the very best of foods.
A pure nature product—one knows just what one’s eating.
Yes, it was really very sweet of Armgard to remember an old
boarding-school friendship and send me the invitation.
Herr von Maiboom was very polite, too. They urged me to
stay a couple of weeks longer, but I know Erica is rather
helpless without me, especially now, with little Elisabeth—”</p>

<p>“How is the child?”</p>

<p>“Doing nicely, Tom. She is really not bad at all, for
four months, even if Henriette and Friederike and Pfiffi did
say she wouldn’t live.”</p>

<p>“And Weinschenk? How does he like being a father? I
never see him except on Thursdays—”</p>

<p>“Oh, he is just the same. You know he is a very good,
hard-working man, and in a way a model husband; he never
stops in anywhere, but comes straight home from the office
and spends all his free time with us. But—you see, Tom—we
can speak quite openly, just between ourselves—he requires
Erica to be always lively, always laughing and talking,
because when he comes home tired and worried from the
office, he needs cheering up, and his wife must amuse him
and divert him.”</p>

<p>“Idiot!” murmured the Senator.</p>

<p>“What? Well, the bad thing about it is, that Erica is
a little bit inclined to be melancholy. She must get it from
me, Tom. Sometimes she is very serious and quiet and
thoughtful; and then he scolds and grumbles and complains,
and really, to tell the truth, is not at all sympathetic. You
can’t help seeing that he is a man of no family, and never enjoyed
what one would call a refined bringing-up. To be
quite frank—a few days before I went to Pöppenrade, he
threw the lid of the soup-tureen on the floor and broke it,
because the soup was too salt.”</p>

<p>“How charming!”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, it wasn’t, not at all! But we must not judge.
God knows, we are all weak creatures—and a good, capable,
industrious man like that—Heaven forbid! No, Tom, a
rough shell with a sound kernel inside is not the worst thing
in this life. I’ve just come from something far sadder than
that, I can tell you! Armgard wept bitterly, when she was
alone with me—”</p>

<p>“You don’t say! Is Herr von Maiboom—?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom—that is what I wanted to tell you. We sit
here visiting, but I really came to-night on a serious and important
errand.”</p>

<p>“Well, what is the trouble with Herr von Maiboom?”</p>

<p>“He is a very charming man, Ralf von Maiboom, Thomas;
but he is very wild—a hail-fellow-well-met with everybody.
He gambles in Rostock, and he gambles in Warnemünde, and
his debts are like the sands of the sea. Nobody could believe
it, just living a couple of weeks at Pöppenrade. The
house is lovely, everything looks flourishing, there is milk
and sausage and ham and all that, in great abundance.
So it is hard to measure the actual situation. But their
affairs are in frightful disorder—Armgard confessed it to
me, with heart-breaking sobs.”</p>

<p>“Very sad.”</p>

<p>“You may well say so. But, as I had already suspected, it
turned out that I was not invited over there just for the sake
of my <i>beaux yeux</i>.”</p>

<p>“How so?”</p>

<p>“I will tell you, Tom. Herr von Maiboom needs a large
sum of money immediately. He knew the old friendship between
his wife and me, and he knew that I am your sister.
So, in his extremity, he put his wife up to it, and she put me
up to it.—You understand?”</p>

<p>The Senator passed his finger-tips across his hair and
screwed up his face a little.</p>

<p>“I think so,” he said. “Your serious and important business
evidently concerns an advance on the Pöppenrade harvest—if
I am not mistaken. But you have come to the
wrong man, I think, you and your friends. In the first place,
I have never done any business with Herr von Maiboom, and
this would be a rather strange way to begin. In the second
place—though, in the past, Grandfather, Father, and I myself
have made advances on occasion to the landed gentry, it
was always when they offered a certain security, either personally
or through their connections. But to judge from the
way you have just characterized Herr von Maiboom and his
prospects, I should say there can be no security in his case.”</p>

<p>“You are mistaken, Tom. I have let you have your say,
but you are mistaken. It is not a question of an advance, at
all. Maiboom has to have thirty-five thousand marks current—”</p>

<p>“Heavens and earth!”</p>

<p>“—five-and-thirty thousand marks current, to be paid within
two weeks. The knife is at his throat—to be plain, he has to
sell at once, immediately.”</p>

<p>“In the blade—oh, the poor chap!” The Senator shook
his head as he stood, playing with his pince-nez on the table-cloth.
“That is a rather unheard-of thing for our sort of
business,” he went on. “I have heard of such things, mostly
in Hesse, where a few of the landed gentry are in the hands
of the Jews. Who knows what sort of cut-throat it is that
has poor Herr von Maiboom in his clutches?”</p>

<p>“Jews? Cut-throats?” cried Frau Permaneder, astonished
beyond measure. “But it’s <i>you</i> we are talking about, Tom!”</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook suddenly threw down his pince-nez
on the table so that it slid along on top of the newspaper,
and turned toward his sister with a jerk.</p>

<p>“Me?” he said, but only with his lips, for he made no
sound. Then he added aloud: “Go to bed, Tony. You are
tired out.”</p>

<p>“Why, Tom, that is what Ida Jungmann used to say to
us, when we were just beginning to have a good time. But I
assure you I was never wider awake in my life than now,
coming over here in the dead of night to make Armgard’s
offer to you—or rather, indirectly, Ralf von Maiboom’s—”</p>

<p>“And I will forgive you for making a proposal which is
the product of your naïveté and the Maibooms’ helplessness.”</p>

<p>“Helplessness? Naïveté, Thomas? I don’t understand
you—I am very far from understanding you. You are offered
an opportunity to do a good deed, and at the same time
the best stroke of business you ever did in your life—”</p>

<p>“Oh, my darling child, you are talking the sheerest nonsense,”
cried the Senator, throwing himself back impatiently
in his chair. “I beg your pardon, but you make me angry
with your ridiculous innocence. Can’t you understand that
you are asking me to do something discreditable, to engage
in underhand manœuvres? Why should I go fishing in
troubled waters? Why should I fleece this poor land-owner?
Why should I take advantage of his necessity to do him out
of a year’s harvest at a usurious profit to myself?”</p>

<p>“Oh, is that the way you look at it!” said Frau Permaneder,
quite taken aback and thoughtful. But she recovered in a
moment and went on: “But it is not at all necessary to look
at it like that, Tom. How are you forcing him, when it
is he who comes to you? He needs the money, and would
like the matter arranged in a friendly way, and under the rose.
That is why he traced out the connection between us, and
invited me to visit.”</p>

<p>“In short, he has made a mistake in his calculations about
me and the character of my firm. I have my own traditions.
We have been in business a hundred years without touching
that sort of transaction, and I have no idea of beginning at
this late day.”</p>

<p>“Certainly, Tom, you have your traditions, and nobody
respects them more than I do. And I know Father would not
have done it—God forbid! Who says he would? But, silly
as I am, I know enough to know that you are quite a different
sort of man from Father, and since you took over the business
it has been different from what it was before. That is
because you were young and had enterprise and brains. But
lately I am afraid you have let yourself get discouraged by
this or that piece of bad luck. And if you are no longer having
the same success you once did, it is because you have been
too cautious and conscientious, and let slip your chances for
good <i>coups</i> when you had them—”</p>

<p>“Oh, my dear child, stop, please; you irritate me!” said
the Senator sharply, and turned away. “Let us change the
subject.”</p>

<p>“Yes, you are vexed, Tom, I can see it. You were from
the beginning, and I have kept on, on purpose, to show you
you are wrong to feel yourself insulted. But I know the
real reason why you are vexed: it is because you are not so
firmly decided not to touch the business. I know I am silly;
but I have noticed about myself—and about other people too—that
we are most likely to get angry and excited in our opposition
to some idea when we ourselves are not quite certain
of our own position, and are inwardly tempted to take the
other side.”</p>

<p>“Very fine,” said the Senator, bit his cigarette-holder, and
was silent.</p>

<p>“Fine? No, it’s very simple—one of the simplest things
life has taught me. But let it go, Tom. I won’t urge you.
Don’t imagine that I think I could persuade you—I know
I don’t know enough. I’m only a silly female. It’s a pity.
Well, never mind.—It interested me very much. On the one
hand I was shocked and upset about the Maibooms, but on
the other I was pleased for you. I said to myself: ‘Tom
has been going about lately feeling very down in the mouth.
He used to complain, but now he does not even complain any
more. He has been losing money, and times are poor—and
all that just now, when God has been good to me, and I am
feeling happier than I have for a long time.’ So I thought,
‘This would be something for him: a stroke of luck, a good
<i>coup</i>. It would offset a good deal of misfortune, and show
people that luck is still on the side of the firm of Johann
Buddenbrook.’ And if you had undertaken it, I should have
been so proud to have been the means—for you know it has
always been my dream and my one desire, to be of some good
to the family name.—Well, never mind. It is settled now.
What I feel vexed about is that Maiboom has to sell, in any
case, and if he looks around in the town here, he will find
a purchaser—and it will be that rascal Hermann Hagenström!”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes—he probably would not refuse it,” the Senator
said bitterly; and Frau Permaneder answered, three times,
one after the other: “You see, you see, you see!”</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook suddenly began to shake his head and
laugh angrily.</p>

<p>“We are silly. We sit here and work ourselves up—at
least, you do—over something that is neither here nor there.
So far as I know, I have not even asked what the thing is
about—what Herr von Maiboom actually has to sell. I do
not know Pöppenrade.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you would have had to go there,” she said eagerly.
“It’s not far from here to Rostock—and from there it is no
distance at all. And as for what he has to sell—Pöppenrade
is a large estate, I know for a fact that it grows more than
a thousand sacks of wheat. But I don’t know details. About
rye, oats, or barley, there might be five hundred sacks of
them, more or less. Everything is of the best, I can say
that. But I can’t give you any figures, I am such a goose,
Tom. You would have to go over.”</p>

<p>A pause ensued.</p>

<p>“No, it is not worth wasting words over,” the Senator said
decidedly. He folded his pince-nez and put it into his pocket,
buttoned up his coat, and began to walk up and down the
room with firm and rapid strides, which studiously betrayed
no sign that he was giving the subject any further consideration.</p>

<p>He paused by the table and turned toward his sister,
drumming lightly on the surface with his bent forefinger as
he said: “I’ll tell you a little story, my dear Tony, which
will illustrate my attitude toward this affair. I know your
weakness for the nobility, and the Mecklenburg nobility in
particular—please don’t mind if one of these gentry gets
rapped a bit. You know, there is now and then one among
them who doesn’t treat the merchant classes with any great
respect, though perfectly aware that he can’t do without
them. Such a man is too much inclined to lay stress on
the superiority—to a certain extent undeniable—of the
producer over the middleman. In short, he sometimes acts
as if the merchant were like a peddling Jew to whom one
sells old clothes, quite conscious that one is being over-reached.
I flatter myself that in my dealings with these
gentry I have not usually made the impression of a morally inferior
exploiter; to tell the truth, the boot has sometimes
been on the other foot—I’ve run across men who were far
less scrupulous than I am! But in one case, it only needed a
single bold stroke to bring me into social relations. The
man was the lord of Gross-Poggendorf, of whom you have
surely heard. I had considerable dealings with him some
while back: Count Strelitz, a very smart-appearing man,
with a square eye-glass (I could never make out why he
did not cut himself), patent-leather top-boots, and a riding-whip
with a gold handle. He had a way of looking down
at me from a great height, with his eyes half-shut and his
mouth half open. My first visit to him was very telling.
We had had some correspondence. I drove over, and was
ushered by a servant into the study, where Count Strelitz was
sitting at his writing-table. He returns my bow, half gets up,
finishes the last lines of a letter; then he turns to me and begins
to talk business, looking over the top of my head. I
lean on the sofa-table, cross my arms and my legs, and enjoy
myself. I stand five minutes talking. After another five
minutes, I sit down on the table and swing my leg. We get
on with our business, and at the end of fifteen minutes he
says to me, very graciously, ‘won’t you sit down?’ ‘Beg
pardon?’ I say. ‘Oh, don’t mention it—I’ve been sitting for
some time!’”</p>

<p>“Did you say that? Really?” cried Frau Permaneder,
enchanted. She had straightway forgotten all that had gone
before, and lived for the moment entirely in the anecdote.</p>

<p>“‘I’ve been sitting for some time’—oh, that is too good!”</p>

<p>“Well, and I assure you that the Count altered his tune at
once. He shook hands when I came, and asked me to sit
down—in the course of time we became very friendly. But
I have told you this in order to ask you if you think I
should have the right, or the courage, or the inner self-confidence
to behave in the same way to Herr von Maiboom
if, when we met to discuss the bargain, he were to forget to
offer me a chair?”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder was silent. “Good,” she said then, and
got up. “You may be right; and, as I said, I’m not going
to press you. You know what you must do and what leave
undone, and that’s an end of it. If you only feel that I spoke
in good part—you do, don’t you? All right. Good night,
Tom. Or—no, wait—I must go and say ‘How do you do’ to
the good Ida and give Hanno a little kiss. I’ll look in again
on my way out.” With that she went.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">She</span> mounted the stairs to the second storey, left the little
balcony on her right, went along the white-and-gold balustrade
and through an ante-chamber, the door of which stood
open on the corridor, and from which a second exit to the
left led into the Senator’s dressing-room. Here she softly
turned the handle of the door opposite and went in.</p>

<p>It was an unusually large chamber, the windows of which
were draped with flowered curtains. The walls were rather
bare: aside from a large black-framed engraving above Ida’s
bed, representing Giacomo Meyerbeer surrounded by the
characters in his operas, there was nothing but a few English
coloured prints of children with yellow hair and little red
frocks, pinned to the window hangings. Ida Jungman sat
at the large extension-table in the middle of the room, darning
Hanno’s stockings. The faithful Prussian was now at the
beginning of the fifties. She had begun early to grow grey,
but her hair had never become quite white, having remained
a mixture of black and grey; her erect bony figure was as
sturdy, and her brown eyes as bright, clear, and unwearied
as twenty years ago.</p>

<p>“Well, Ida, you good soul,” said Frau Permaneder, in a
low but lively voice, for her brother’s little story had put her
in good spirits, “and how are you, you old stand-by, you?”</p>

<p>“What’s that, Tony—stand-by, is it? And how do you
come to be here so late?”</p>

<p>“I’ve been with my brother—on pressing business. Unfortunately,
it didn’t turn out.—Is he asleep?” she asked,
and gestured with her chin toward the little bed on the left
wall, its head close to the door that led into the parents’
sleeping chamber.</p>

<p>“Sh-h!” said Ida. “Yes, he is asleep.” Frau Permaneder
went on her tip-toes toward the little bed, cautiously raised
the curtain, and bent to look down at her sleeping nephew’s
face.</p>

<p>The small Johann Buddenbrook lay on his back, his little
face, in its frame of long light-brown hair, turned toward
the room. He was breathing softly but audibly into the
pillow. Only the fingers showed beneath the too long, too
wide sleeves of his nightgown: one of his hands lay on his
breast, the other on the coverlet, with the bent fingers jerking
slightly now and then. The half-parted lips moved a little
too, as if forming words. From time to time a pained expression
mounted over the little face, beginning with a trembling
of the chin, making the lips and the delicate nostrils
quiver and the muscles of the narrow forehead contract. The
long dark eyelashes did not hide the blue shadows that lay in
the corners of the eyes.</p>

<p>“He is dreaming,” said Frau Permaneder, moved.</p>

<p>She bent over the child and gently kissed his slumbering
cheek; then she composed the curtains and went back to the
table, where Ida, in the golden light from the lamp, drew a
fresh stocking over her darning-ball, looked at the hole, and
began to fill it in.</p>

<p>“You are darning, Ida—funny, I can’t imagine you doing
anything else.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, Tony. The boy tears everything, now he has
begun to go to school.”</p>

<p>“But he is such a quiet, gentle child.”</p>

<p>“Ye-s, he is. But even so—”</p>

<p>“Does he like going to school?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no-o, Tony. He would far rather have gone on here
with me. And I should have liked it better too. The masters
haven’t known him since he was a baby, the way I have—they
don’t know how to take him, when they are teaching him.
It is often hard for him to pay attention, and he gets tired
so easily—”</p>

<p>“Poor darling! Have they whipped him yet?”</p>

<p>“No, indeed. Sakes alive, how could they have the heart,
if the boy once looked at them—?”</p>

<p>“How was it the first time he went? Did he cry?”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, he did. He cries so easily—not loud, but
sort of to himself. And he held your brother by the coat
and begged to be allowed to stop at home—”</p>

<p>“Oh, my brother took him, did he?—Yes, that is a hard
moment, Ida. I remember it like yesterday. I <i>howled</i>, I
do assure you. I howled like a chained-up dog; I felt dreadfully.
And why? Because I had had such a good time at
home. I noticed at once that all the children from the nice
houses wept, and the others not at all—they just stared and
grinned at us.—Goodness, what is the matter with him, Ida?”</p>

<p>She turned in alarm toward the little bed, where a cry
had interrupted her chatter. It was a frightened cry, and it
repeated itself in an even more anguished tone the next
minute; and then three, four, five times more, one after another.
“Oh, oh, <i>oh</i>!” It became a loud, desperate protest
against something which he saw or which was happening to
him. The next moment little Johann sat upright in bed,
stammering incomprehensibly, and staring with wide-open,
strange golden-brown eyes into a world which he, and he
alone, could see.</p>

<p>“That’s nothing,” said Ida. “It is the <i>pavor</i>. It is sometimes
much worse than that.” She put her work down calmly
and crossed the room, with her long heavy stride, to Hanno’s
bed. She spoke to him in a low, quieting voice, laid him
down, and covered him again.</p>

<p>“Oh, I see—the <i>pavor</i>,” repeated Frau Permaneder. “What
will he do now? Will he wake up?”</p>

<p>But Hanno did not waken at all, though his eyes were
wide and staring, and his lips still moved.</p>

<p class="center">“‘In my—little—garden—go—,’”</p>

<p>said Hanno, mumblingly,</p>

<p class="center">“‘All—my—onions—water—’”</p>

<p>“He is saying his piece,” explained Ida Jungmann, shaking
her head. “There, there, little darling—go to sleep now.”</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first2">“‘Little man stands—stands there—</div>
<div class="verse">He begins—to—sneeze—’”</div>
</div></div>

<p>He sighed. Suddenly his face changed, his eyes half-closed;
he moved his head back and forth on the pillow and said in
a low, plaintive sing-song:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first2">“‘The moon it shines,</div>
<div class="verse">The baby cries,</div>
<div class="verse">The clock strikes twelve,</div>
<div class="verse">God help all suff’ring folk to close their eyes.’”</div>
</div></div>

<p>But with the words came so deep a sob that tears rolled out
from under his lashes and down his cheeks and wakened him.
He put his arms around Ida, looked about him with tear-wet
eyes, murmured something in a satisfied tone about “Aunt
Tony,” turned himself a little in his bed, and then went
quietly off to sleep.</p>

<p>“How very strange,” said Frau Permaneder, as Ida sat
down at the table once more. “What was all that?”</p>

<p>“They are in his reader,” answered Fräulein Jungmann.
“It says underneath ‘The Boys’ Magic Horn.’ They are all
rather queer. He has been having to learn them, and he talks
a great deal about that one with the little man. Do you
know it? It is really rather frightening. It is a little
dwarf that gets into everything: eats up the broth and breaks
the pot, steals the wood, stops the spinning-wheel, teases
everybody—and then, at the end, he asks to be prayed for! It
touched the child very much. He has thought about it day
in and day out; and two or three times he said: ‘You know,
Ida, he doesn’t do that to be wicked, but only because he is
unhappy, and it only makes him more unhappy still....
But if one prays for him, then he does not need to do it any
more!’ Even to-night, when his Mama kissed him good night
before she went to the concert, he asked her to ‘pray for the
little man.’”</p>

<p>“And did he pray too?”</p>

<p>“Not aloud, but probably to himself.—He hasn’t said much
about the other poem—it is called ‘The Nursery Clock’—he
has only wept. He weeps so easy, poor little lad, and it is
so hard for him to stop.”</p>

<p>“But what is there so sad about it?”</p>

<p>“How do I know? He has never been able to say any more
than the beginning of it, the part that makes him cry in his
sleep. And that about the waggoner, who gets up at three
from his bed of straw—that always made him weep too.”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder laughed emotionally, and then looked
serious.</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you, Ida, it’s no good. It isn’t good for him to
feel everything so much. ‘The waggoner gets up at three
from his bed of straw’—why, of course he does! That’s why
he is a waggoner. I can see already that the child takes
everything too much to heart—it consumes him, I feel sure.
We must speak seriously with Grabow. But there, that is just
what it is,” she went on, folding her arms, putting her head
on one side, and tapping the floor nervously with her foot.
“Grabow is getting old; and aside from that, good as he is—and
he really is a very good man, a perfect angel—so far as
his skill is concerned, I have no such great opinion of it, Ida,
and may God forgive me if I am wrong. Take this nervousness
of Hanno’s, his starting up at night and having such
frights in his sleep. Grabow knows what it is, and all he does
is to tell us the Latin name of it—<i>pavor nocturnus</i>. Dear
knows, that is very enlightening, of course! No, he is a dear
good man, and a great friend of the family and all that—but
he is no great light. An important man looks different—he
shows when he is young that there is something in him. Grabow
lived through the ’48. He was a young man then. Do
you imagine he was the least bit thrilled over it—over
freedom and justice, and the downfall of privilege and arbitrary
power? He is a cultivated man; but I am convinced
that the unheard-of laws concerning the press and the universities
did not interest him in the least. He has never behaved
even the least little bit wild, never jumped over the traces.
He has always had just the same long, mild face, and always
prescribed pigeon and French bread, and when anything is
serious, a teaspoon of tincture of althaea.—Good night, Ida.
No, I think there are other doctors in the world! Too bad I
have missed Gerda. Yes, thanks, there is a light in the
corridor. Good night.”</p>

<p>When Frau Permaneder opened the dining-room door in
passing, to call a good night to her brother in the living-room,
she saw that the whole storey was lighted up, and that Thomas
was walking up and down with his hands behind his back.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> Senator, when he was alone again, sat down at the
table, took out his glasses, and tried to resume his reading.
But in a few minutes his eyes had roved from the printed page,
and he sat for a long time without changing his position,
gazing straight ahead of him between the portières into the
darkness of the salon.</p>

<p>His face, when he was alone, changed so that it was hardly
recognizable. The muscles of his mouth and cheeks, otherwise
obedient to his will, relaxed and became flabby. Like
a mask the look of vigour, alertness, and amiability, which
now for a long time had been preserved only by constant
effort, fell from his face, and betrayed an anguished weariness
instead. The tired, worried eyes gazed at objects without
seeing them; they became red and watery. He made no
effort to deceive even himself; and of all the dull, confused,
and rambling thoughts that filled his mind he clung to only
one: the single, despairing thought that Thomas Buddenbrook,
at forty-three years, was an old, worn-out man.</p>

<p>He rubbed his hand over his eyes and forehead, drawing
a long, deep breath, mechanically lighted another cigarette,
though he knew they were bad for him, and continued to
gaze through the smoke-haze into the darkness. What a contrast
between that relaxed and suffering face and the elegant,
almost military style of his hair and beard! the stiffened and
perfumed mustaches, the meticulously shaven cheeks and
chin, and the careful hair-dressing which sedulously hid a
beginning thinness. The hair ran back in two longish bays
from the delicate temples, with a narrow parting on top; over
the ears it was not long and waving, but kept short-cut now, in
order not to betray how grey it had grown. He himself felt
the change and knew it could not have escaped the eyes of
others: the contrast between his active, elastic movements and
the dull pallor of his face.</p>

<p>Not that he was in reality less of an important and indispensable
personage than he always had been. His friends
said, and his enemies could not deny, that Senator Buddenbrook
was the Burgomaster’s right hand: Burgomaster
Langhals was even more emphatic on that point than his
predecessor Överdieck had been. But the firm of Johann
Buddenbrook was no longer what it had been—this seemed
to be common property, so much so that Herr Stuht discussed
it with his wife over their bacon broth—and Thomas
Buddenbrook groaned over the fact.</p>

<p>At the same time, it was true that he himself was mainly
responsible. He was still a rich man, and none of the losses
he had suffered, even the severe one of the year ’66, had
seriously undermined the existence of the firm. But the notion
that his luck and his consequence had fled, based though
it was more upon inward feelings than upon outward facts,
brought him to a state of lowness and suspicion. He entertained,
of course, as before, and set before his guests the
normal and expected number of courses. But, as never
before, he began to cling to money and, in his private life,
to save in small and petty ways. He had a hundred times
regretted the building of his new house, which he felt had
brought him nothing but bad luck. The summer holidays
were given up, and the little city garden had to take the place
of mountains or seashore. The family meals were, by his
express and emphatic command, of such simplicity as to seem
absurd by contrast with the lofty, splendid dining-room, with
its extent of parquetry floors and its imposing oak furniture.
For a long time now, there had been dessert only on Sundays.
His own appearance was as elegant as ever; but the old
servant, Anton, carried to the kitchen the news that the
master only changed his shirt now every <i>other</i> day, as the
washing was too hard on the fine linen. He knew more than
that. He knew that he was to be dismissed. Gerda protested:
three servants were few enough to do the work of so
large a house as it should be done. But it was no use: old
Anton, who had so long sat on the box when Thomas Buddenbrook
drove down to the Senate, was sent away with a suitable
present.</p>

<p>Such decrees as these were in harmony with the joyless
state of affairs in the firm. That fresh enterprising spirit
with which young Thomas Buddenbrook had taken up the
reins—that was all gone, now; and his partner, Herr Friedrich
Wilhelm Marcus—who, with his small capital, could
not have had a prepondering influence in any case—was
by nature lacking in initiative.</p>

<p>Herr Marcus’ pedantry had so increased in the course of
years that it had become a distinct eccentricity. It took him
a quarter of an hour of stroking his moustaches, casting side-glances,
and giving little coughs, just to cut his cigar and
put the tip in his pocket-book. Evenings, when the gas-light
made every corner of the office as bright as day, he still
used a tallow candle on his own desk. Every half-hour he
would get up and go to the tap and put water on his head.
One morning there had been an empty sack untidily left under
his desk. He took it for a cat and began to shoo it out with
loud imprecations, to the joy of the office staff. No, he was
not the man to give any quickening impulse to the business in
the face of his partner’s present lassitude. Mortification and
a sort of desperate irritation often seized upon the Senator:
as now, when he sat and stared wearily into the darkness,
bringing home to himself the petty retail transactions and
the pennywise policies to which the firm of Johann Buddenbrook
had lately sunk.</p>

<p>But, after all, was it not best thus? Misfortune too has
its time, he thought. Is it not better, while it holds sway, to
keep oneself still, to wait in quiet and assemble one’s inner
powers? Why must this proposition come up just now, to
shake him untimely out of his canny resignation and make
him a prey to doubts and suspicions? Was the time come?
Was this a sign? Should he feel encouraged to stand up and
strike a blow? He had refused with all the decisiveness he
could put into his voice, to think of the proposition; but had
that settled it? It seemed not, since here he sat and brooded
over it. “We are most likely to get angry in our opposition
to some idea when we ourselves are not quite certain of our
own position.” A deucedly sly little person, Tony was!</p>

<p>What had he answered her? He had spoken very
impressively, he recollected, about “underhand manœuvres,”
“fishing in troubled waters,” “fleecing the poor land-owner,”
“usury,” and so on. Very fine! But really one might ask
if this were just the right time for so many large words.
Consul Hermann Hagenström would not have thought of
them, and would not have used them. Was he, Thomas
Buddenbrook, a man of action, a business man—or was he a
finicking dreamer?</p>

<p>Yes, that was the question. It had always been, as far
back as he could remember, the question. Life was harsh:
and business, with its ruthless unsentimentality, was an
epitome of life. Did Thomas Buddenbrook, like his father,
stand firmly on his two feet, in face of this hard practicality
of life? Often enough, even far back in the past, he had
seen reason to doubt it. Often enough, from his youth
onwards, he had sternly brought his feelings into line. To
inflict punishment, to take punishment, and not to think of
it as punishment, but as something to be taken for granted—should
he never completely learn that lesson?</p>

<p>He recalled the catastrophe of the year 1866, and the inexpressibly
painful emotions which had then overpowered
him. He had lost a large sum of money in the affair—but
that had not been the unbearable thing about it. For the
first time in his career he had fully and personally experienced
the ruthless brutality of business life and seen how
all better, gentler, and kindlier sentiments creep away and
hide themselves before the one raw, naked, dominating instinct
of self-preservation. He had seen that when one suffers a
misfortune in business, one is met by one’s friends—and one’s
best friends—not with sympathy, not with compassion, but
with suspicion—cold, cruel, hostile suspicion. But he had
known all this before; why should he be surprised at it?
And in stronger and hardier hours he had blushed for his
own weakness, for his own distress and sleepless nights, for
his revulsion and disgust at the hateful and shameless harshness
of life!</p>

<p>How foolish all that was! How ridiculous such feelings
had been! How could he entertain them?—unless, indeed,
he were a feeble visionary and not a practical business man
at all! Ah, how many times had he asked himself that
question? And how many times had he answered it: in
strong and purposeful hours with one answer, in weak
and discouraged ones with another! But he was too shrewd
and too honest not to admit, after all, that he was a mixture
of both.</p>

<p>All his life, he had made the impression on others of a
practical man of action. But in so far as he legitimately
passed for one—he, with his fondness for quotations from
Goethe—was it not because he deliberately set out to do so?
He had been successful in the past, but was that not because
of the enthusiasm and impetus drawn from reflection?
And if he were now discouraged, if his powers were lamed—God
grant it was only for a time—was not his depression the
natural consequence of the conflict that went on within himself?
Whether his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather
would have brought the Pöppenrade harvest in the blade was
not the point after all. The thing was that they were
practical men, more naturally, more vigorously, more impeccably
practical than he was himself.</p>

<p>He was seized by a great unrest, by a need for movement,
space, and light. He shoved back his chair, went into the
salon, and lighted several burners of the chandelier over the
centre-table. He stood there, pulling slowly and spasmodically
at the long ends of his moustaches and vacantly gazing
about the luxurious room. Together with the living-room
it occupied the whole front of the house; it had light, ornate
furniture and looked like a music-room, with the great
grand piano, Gerda’s violin-case, the étagère with music books,
the carved music-stand, and the bas-reliefs of singing cupids
over the doors. The bow-window was filled with palms.</p>

<p>Senator Buddenbrook stood for two or three minutes
motionless. Then he went back through the living-room
into the dining-room and made light there also. He stopped
at the sideboard and poured a glass of water, either to be
doing something or to quiet his heart. Then he moved
quickly on through the house, lighting up as he went. The
smoking-room was furnished in dark colours and wainscoted.
He absently opened the door of the cigar cabinet and shut
it again, and at the table lifted the lid of a little oak box
which had playing-cards, score-cards, and other such things
in it. He let some of the bone counters glide through his
fingers with a rattling sound, clapped the lid shut, and began
again to walk up and down.</p>

<p>A little room with a small stained-glass window opened
into the smoking-room. It was empty except for some small
light serving-tables of the kind which fit one within another.
On one of them a liqueur cabinet stood. From here one
entered the dining-room, with its great extent of parquetry
flooring and its four high windows, hung with wine-coloured
curtains, looking out into the garden. It also occupied the
whole breadth of the house. It was furnished by two low,
heavy sofas, covered with the same wine-coloured material as
the curtains, and by a number of high-backed chairs standing
stiffly along the walls. Behind the fire-screen was a chimney-place,
its artificial coals covered with shining red paper to
make them look glowing. On the marble mantel-shelf in
front of the mirror stood two towering Chinese vases.</p>

<p>The whole storey was now lighted by the flame of single
gas-jets, and looked like a party the moment after the last
guest is gone. The Senator measured the room throughout
its length, and then stood at one of the windows and looked
down into the garden.</p>

<p>The moon stood high and small between fleecy clouds, and
the little fountain splashed in the stillness over the overhanging
boughs of the walnut tree. Thomas looked down on
the pavilion which enclosed his view, on the little glistening
white terrace with the two obelisks, the regular gravel paths,
and the freshly turned earth of the neat borders and beds.
But this whole minute and punctilious symmetry, far from
soothing him, only made him feel the more exasperated. He
held the catch of the window, leaned his forehead on it, and
gave rein to his tormenting thoughts again.</p>

<p>What was he coming to? He thought of a remark he had
let fall to his sister—something he had felt vexed with himself
the next minute for saying, it seemed so unnecessary.
He was speaking of Count Strelitz and the landed aristocracy,
and he had expressed the view that the producer had a social
advantage over the middleman. What was the point of that?
It might be true and it might not; but was he, Thomas
Buddenbrook, called upon to express such ideas—was he
called upon even to think them? Should he have been able
to explain to the satisfaction of his father, his grandfather—or
any of his fellow townsmen—how he came to be expressing,
or indulging in, such thoughts? A man who stands firm
and confident in his own calling, whatever it may be, recognizes
only it, understands only it, values only it.</p>

<p>Then he suddenly felt the blood rushing to his face as he
recalled another memory, from farther back in the past.
He saw himself and his brother Christian, walking around
the garden of the Meng Street house, involved in a quarrel—one
of those painful, regrettable, heated discussions.
Christian, with artless indiscretion, had made a highly undesirable,
a compromising remark, which a number of people
had heard; and Thomas, furiously angry, irritated to the last
degree, had called him to account. At bottom, Christian had
said, at bottom every business man was a rascal. Well! was
that foolish and trifling remark, in point of fact, so different
from what he himself had just said to his sister? He had
been furiously angry then, had protested violently—but what
was it that sly little Tony said? “When we ourselves are not
quite certain of our own position....”</p>

<p>“No,” said the Senator, suddenly, aloud, lifted his head with
a jerk, and let go the window fastening. He fairly pushed
himself away from it. “That settles it,” he said. He
coughed, for the sound of his own voice in the emptiness made
him feel unpleasant. He turned and began to walk quickly
through all the rooms, his hands behind his back and his head
bowed.</p>

<p>“That settles it,” he repeated. “It will have to settle it.
I am wasting time, I am sinking into a morass, I’m getting
worse than Christian.” It was something to be glad of, at
least, that he was in no doubt where he stood. It lay, then,
in his own hands to apply the corrective. Relentlessly. Let
us see, now—let us see—what sort of offer was it they had
made? The Pöppenrade harvest, in the blade? “I will do
it!” he said in a passionate whisper, even stretching out one
hand and shaking the forefinger. “I will do it!”</p>

<p>It would be, he supposed, what one would call a <i>coup</i>:
an opportunity to double a capital of, say, forty thousand
marks current—though that was probably an exaggeration.—Yes,
it was a sign—a signal to him that he should rouse
himself! It was the first step, the beginning, that counted;
and the risk connected with it was a sort of offset to his
moral scruples. If it succeeded, then he was himself again,
then he would venture once more, then he would know how
to hold fortune and influence fast within his grip.</p>

<p>No, Messrs. Strunck and Hagenström would not be able to
profit by this occasion, unfortunately for them. There was
another firm in the place, which, thanks to personal connections,
had the upper hand. In fact, the personal was here
the decisive factor. It was no ordinary business, to be
carried out in the ordinary way. Coming through Tony, as
it had, it bore more the character of a private transaction, and
would need to be carried out with discretion and tact.
Hermann Hagenström would hardly have been the man for
the job. He, Thomas Buddenbrook, as a business man, was
taking advantage of the market—and he would, by God,
when he sold, know how to do the same. On the other
hand, he was doing the hard-pressed land-owner a favour
which he was called upon to do, by reason of Tony’s connection
with the Maibooms. The thing to do was to write, to
write this evening—not on the business paper with the firm
name, but on his own personal letter-paper with “Senator
Buddenbrook” stamped across it. He would write in a
courteous tone and ask if a visit in the next few days would
be agreeable. But it was a difficult business, none the less—slippery
ground, upon which one needed to move with care.— Well,
so much the better for him.</p>

<p>His step grew quicker, his breathing deeper. He sat
down a moment, sprang up again, and began roaming about
through all the rooms. He thought it all out again; he
thought about Herr Marcus, Hermann Hagenström, Christian,
and Tony; he saw the golden harvests of Pöppenrade wave
in the breeze, and dreamed of the upward bound the old
firm would take after this coup; scornfully repulsed all his
scruples and hesitations, put out his hand and said “I’ll do
it!”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder opened the door and called out “Good-bye!”
He answered her without knowing it. Gerda said
good night to Christian at the house door and came upstairs,
her strange deep-set eyes wearing the expression that music
always gave them. The Senator stopped mechanically in his
walk, asked mechanically about the concert and the Spanish
virtuoso, and said he was ready to go to bed.</p>

<p>But he did not go. He took up his wanderings again.
He thought about the sacks of wheat and rye and oats and
barley which should fill the lofts of the Lion, the Walrus, the
Oak, and the Linden; he thought about the price he intended
to ask—of course it should not be an extravagant price. He
went softly at midnight down into the counting-house and, by
the light of Herr Marcus’ tallow candle, wrote a letter to
Herr von Maiboom of Pöppenrade—a letter which, as he read
it through, his head feeling feverish and heavy, he thought
was the best and most tactful he had ever written.</p>

<p>That was the night of May 27. The next day he indicated
to his sister, treating the affair in a light, semi-humorous
way, that he had thought it all over and decided that he
could not just refuse Herr von Maiboom out of hand and
leave him at the mercy of the nearest swindler. On the
thirtieth of May he went to Rostock, whence he drove in a
hired wagon out to the country.</p>

<p>His mood for the next few days was of the best, his step elastic
and free, his manners easy. He teased Clothilde, laughed
heartily at Christian, joked with Tony, and played with Hanno
in the little gallery for a whole hour on Sunday, helping
him to hoist up miniature sacks of grain into a little brick-red
granary, and imitating the hollow, drawling shouts of the
workmen. And at the Burgesses’ meeting of the third of June
he made a speech on the most tiresome subject in the world,
something connected with taxation, which was so brilliant and
witty that everybody agreed with it unanimously, and Consul
Hagenström, who had opposed him, became almost a
laughing-stock.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Was</span> it forgetfulness, or was it intention, which would have
made Senator Buddenbrook pass over in silence a certain
fact, had not his sister Tony, the devotee of the family
papers, announced it to all the world: the fact, namely,
that in those documents the founding of the firm of Johann
Buddenbrook was ascribed to the date of the 7th of July,
1768, the hundredth anniversary of which was now at
hand?</p>

<p>Thomas seemed almost disturbed when Tony, in a moving
voice, called his attention to the fact. His good mood had
not lasted. All too soon he had fallen silent again, more
silent than before. He would leave the office in the midst
of work, seized with unrest, and roam about the garden,
sometimes pausing as if he felt confined in his movements,
sighing, and covering his eyes with his hand. He said nothing,
gave his feelings no vent—to whom should he speak,
then? When he told his partner of the Pöppenrade matter,
Herr Marcus had for the first time in his life been angry
with him, and had washed his hands of the whole affair.
But Thomas betrayed himself to his sister Tony, when they
said good-bye on the street one Thursday evening, and she
alluded to the Pöppenrade harvest. He gave her hand a
single quick squeeze, and added passionately “Oh, Tony, if
I had only sold it already!” He broke off abruptly, and
they parted, leaving Frau Permaneder dismayed and anxious.
The sudden hand-pressure had something despairing, the low
words betrayed pent-up feeling. But when Tony, as chance
offered, tried to come back to the subject, he wrapped himself
in silence, the more forbidding because of his inward
mortification over having given way—his inward bitterness
at being, as he felt, feeble and inadequate to the situation in
hand.</p>

<p>He said now, slowly and fretfully: “Oh, my dear child,
I wish we might ignore the whole affair!”</p>

<p>“Ignore it, Tom? Impossible! Unthinkable! Do you
think you could suppress the fact? Do you imagine
the whole town would forget the meaning of the day?”</p>

<p>“I don’t say it is possible—I only say I wish it were. It
is pleasant to celebrate the past, when one is gratified with the
present and the future. It is agreeable to think of one’s
forefathers when one feels at one with them and conscious
of having acted as they would have done. If the jubilee
came at a better time—but just now, I feel small inclination to
celebrate it.”</p>

<p>“You must not talk like that, Tom. You don’t mean it;
you know perfectly that it would be a shame to let the hundredth
anniversary of the firm of Johann Buddenbrook go
by without a sign or a sound of rejoicing. You are a little
nervous now, and I know why, though there is really no
reason for it. But when the day comes, you will be as moved
as all the rest of us.”</p>

<p>She was right; the day could not be passed over in silence.
It was not long before a notice appeared in the papers,
calling attention to the coming anniversary and giving a
detailed history of the old and estimable firm—but it was
really hardly necessary. In the family, Justus Kröger
was the first to mention the approaching event, on the
Thursday afternoon; and Frau Permaneder saw to it
that the venerable leather portfolio was solemnly brought
out after dessert was cleared away, and the whole family, by
way of foretaste, perused the dates and events in the life of
the first Johann Buddenbrook, Hanno’s great-great-grandfather:
when he had varioloid and when genuine smallpox,
when he fell out of the third-storey window on to the floor
of the drying-house, and when he had fever and delirium—she
read all that aloud with pious fervour. Not content with
that, she must go back into the 16th century, to the oldest
Buddenbrook of whom there was knowledge, to the one who
was Councillor in Grabau, and the Rostock tailor who had
been “very well off” and had so many children, living and
dead. “What a splendid man!” she cried; and began to
rummage through yellow papers and read letters and poems
aloud.</p>

<p>On the morning of the seventh of July, Herr Wenzel was
naturally the first with his congratulations.</p>

<p>“Well, Herr Sen’ter, many happy returns!” he said,
gesturing freely with razor and strop in his red hands. “A
hundred years! And nearly half of it, I may say, I have
been shaving in the respected family—oh, yes, one goes
through a deal with the family, when one sees the head of
it the first thing in the morning! The deceased Herr Consul
was always the most talkative in the morning, too: ‘Wenzel,’
he would ask me, ‘Wenzel, what do you think about the rye?
Should I sell or do you think it will go up again?’”</p>

<p>“Yes, Wenzel, and I cannot think of these years without
you, either. Your calling, as I’ve often said to you, has a
certain charm about it. When you have made your rounds,
you are wiser than anybody: you have had the heads of
nearly all the great houses under your hand, and know the
mood of each one. All the others can envy you that, for it
is really valuable information.”</p>

<p>“’s a good bit of truth in that, Herr Sen’ter. But what
about the Herr Sen’ter’s own mood, if I may be so bold to
ask? Herr Sen’ter’s looking a trifle pale again this morning.”</p>

<p>“Am I? Well, I have a headache—and so far as I can
see, it will get worse before it gets better, for I suspect they’ll
put a good deal of strain on it to-day.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid so, Herr Sen’ter. The interest is great—the
interest is very great. Just look out o’ window when I’ve
done with you. Hosts of flags! And down at the bottom
of the Street the ‘Wullenwewer’ and the ‘Friederike
Överdieck’ with all their pennons flying.”</p>

<p>“Well, lets be quick, then, Wenzel; there’s no time to lose,
evidently.”</p>

<p>The Senator did not don his office jacket, as he usually did
of a morning, but put on at once a black cutaway coat with
a white waistcoat and light-coloured trousers. There would
certainly be visits. He gave a last glance in the mirror, a
last pressure of the tongs to his moustache, and turned with a
little sigh to go. The dance was beginning. If only the day
were well over! Would he have a single minute to himself,
a single minute to relax the muscles of his face? All day
long he should certainly have to receive, with tact and
dignity, the congratulations of a host of people, find just the
right word and just the right tone for everybody, be serious,
hearty, ironic, jocose, and respectful by turns; and from
afternoon late into the night there would be the dinner at the
Ratskeller.</p>

<p>It was not true that his head ached. He was only tired.
Already, though he had just risen, with his nerves refreshed
by sleep, he felt his old, indefinable burden upon him. Why
had he said his head ached—as though he always had a
bad conscience where his own health was concerned? Why?
Why? However, there was no time now to brood over the
question.</p>

<p>He went into the dining-room, where Gerda met him gaily.
She too was already arrayed to meet their guests, in a plaid
skirt, a white blouse, and a thin silk zouave jacket over it,
the colour of her heavy hair. She smiled and showed her
white teeth, so large and regular, whiter than her white face;
her eyes, those close-set, enigmatic brown eyes, were smiling
too, to-day.</p>

<p>“I’ve been up for hours—you can tell from that how excited
I am,” she said, “and how hearty my congratulations are.”</p>

<p>“Well, well! So the hundred years make an impression on
you too?”</p>

<p>“Tremendous. But perhaps it is only the excitement of the
celebration. What a day! Look at that, for instance.”
She pointed to the breakfast-table, all garlanded with garden
flowers. “That is Fräulein Jungmann’s work. But you are
mistaken if you think you can drink tea now. The family is
in the drawing-room already, waiting to make a presentation—something
in which I too have had a share. Listen,
Thomas. This is, of course, only the beginning of a stream
of callers. At first I can stand it, but at about midday I
shall have to withdraw, I am sure. The barometer has fallen
a little, but the sky is still the most staring blue. It makes
the flags look lovely, of course, and the whole town is
flagged—but it will be frightfully hot. Come into the salon.
Breakfast must wait. You should have been up before.
Now the first excitement will have to come on an empty
stomach.”</p>

<p>The Frau Consul, Christian, Clothilde, Ida Jungmann, Frau
Permaneder, and Hanno were assembled in the salon, the last
two supporting, not without difficulty, the family present, a
great commemorative tablet. The Frau Consul, deeply
moved, embraced her eldest-born.</p>

<p>“This is a wonderful day, my dear son—a wonderful day,”
she repeated. “We must thank God unceasingly, with all our
hearts, for His mercies—for all His mercies.” She wept.</p>

<p>The Senator was attacked by weakness in her embrace.
He felt as though something within him freed itself and flew
away. His lips trembled. An overwhelming need possessed
him to lay his head upon his mother’s breast, to close his
eyes in her arms, to breathe in the delicate perfume that rose
from the soft silk of her gown, to lie there at rest, seeing
nothing more, saying nothing more. He kissed her and
stood erect, putting out his hand to his brother, who greeted
him with the absent-minded embarrassment which was his
usual bearing on such occasions. Clothilde drawled out
something kindly. Ida Jungmann confined herself to making
a deep bow, while she played with the silver watch-chain on
her flat bosom.</p>

<p>“Come here, Tom,” said Frau Permaneder uncertainly.
“We can’t hold it any longer, can we, Hanno?” She was
holding it almost alone, for Hanno’s little arms were not
much help; and she looked, what with her enthusiasm and
her effort, like an enraptured martyr. Her eyes were moist,
her cheeks burned, and her tongue played, with a mixture of
mischief and nervousness, on her upper lip.</p>

<p>“Here I am,” said the Senator. “What in the world is
this? Come, let me have it; we’ll lean it against the wall.”
He propped it up next to the piano and stood looking at it,
surrounded by the family.</p>

<p>In a large, heavy frame of carved nut-wood were the
portraits of the four owners of the firm, under glass. There
was the founder, Johann Buddenbrook, taken from an old oil
painting—a tall, grave old gentleman, with his lips firmly
closed, looking severe and determined above his lace jabot.
There was the broad and jovial countenance of Johann Buddenbrook,
the friend of Jean Jacques Hoffstede. There was
Consul Johann Buddenbrook, in a stiff choker collar, with
his wide, wrinkled mouth and large aquiline nose, his eyes
full of religious fervour. And finally there was Thomas
Buddenbrook himself, as a somewhat younger man. The
four portraits were divided by conventionalized blades of
wheat, heavily gilded, and beneath, likewise in figures of
brilliant gilt, the dates 1768-1868. Above the whole, in the
tall, Gothic hand of him who had left it to his descendants,
was the quotation: “My son, attend with zeal, to thy business
by day; but do none that hinders thee from thy sleep at
night.”</p>

<p>The Senator, his hands behind his back gazed for a long
time at the tablet.</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” he said abruptly, and his tone was rather
mocking, “an undisturbed night’s rest is a very good thing.”
Then, seriously, if perhaps a little perfunctorily, “Thank
you very much, my dear family. It is indeed a most thoughtful
and beautiful gift. What do you think—where shall we
put it? Shall we hang it in my private office?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom, over the desk in your office,” answered Frau
Permaneder, and embraced her brother. Then she drew him
into the bow-window and pointed.</p>

<p>Under a deep blue sky, the two-coloured flag floated above
all the houses, right down Fishers’ Lane, from Broad Street
to the wharf, where the “Wullenwewer” and the “Friederike
Överdieck” lay under full flag, in their owner’s honour.</p>

<p>“The whole town is the same,” said Frau Permaneder, and
her voice trembled. “I’ve been out and about already.
Even the Hagenströms have a flag. They couldn’t do otherwise.—I’d
smash in their window!” He smiled, and they
went back to the table together. “And here are the telegrams,
Tom, the first ones to come—the personal ones, of
course; the others have been sent to the office.” They
opened a few of the dispatches: from the family in
Hamburg, from the Frankfort Buddenbrooks, from Herr
Arnoldsen in Amsterdam, from Jürgen Kröger in Wismar.
Suddenly Frau Permaneder flushed deeply.</p>

<p>“He is a good man, in his way,” she said, and pushed across
to her brother the telegram she had just opened: it was signed
Permaneder.</p>

<p>“But time is passing,” said the Senator, and looked at his
watch. “I’d like my tea. Will you come in with me? The
house will be like a bee-hive after a while.”</p>

<p>His wife, who had given a sign to Ida Jungmann, held him
back.</p>

<p>“Just a moment, Thomas. You know Hanno has to go to
his lessons. He wants to say a poem to you first. Come
here, Hanno. And now, just as if no one else were here—you
remember? Don’t be excited.”</p>

<p>It was the summer holidays, of course, but little Hanno had
private lessons in arithmetic, in order to keep up with his
class. Somewhere out in the suburb of St. Gertrude, in a
little ill-smelling room, a man in a red beard, with dirty
fingernails, was waiting to discipline him in the detested
“tables.” But first he was to recite to Papa a poem painfully
learned by heart, with Ida Jungmann’s help, in the little
balcony on the second floor.</p>

<p>He leaned against the piano, in his blue sailor suit with
the white V front and the wide linen collar with a
big sailor’s knot coming out beneath. His thin legs were
crossed, his body and head a little inclined in an attitude
of shy, unconscious grace. Two or three weeks before, his
hair had been cut, as not only his fellow-pupils, but the
master as well, had laughed at it; but his head was still
covered with soft abundant ringlets, growing down over the
forehead and temples. His eyelids drooped, so that the long
brown lashes lay over the deep blue shadows; and his closed
lips were a little wry.</p>

<p>He knew well what would happen. He would begin to
cry, would not be able to finish for crying; and his heart
would contract, as it did on Sundays in St. Mary’s, when
Herr Pfühl played on the organ in a certain piercingly solemn
way. It always turned out that he wept when they wanted
him to do something—when they examined him and tried to
find out what he knew, as Papa so loved to do. If only
Mamma had not spoken of getting excited! She meant to
be encouraging, but he felt it was a mistake. There they
stood, and looked at him. They expected, and feared, that he
would break down—so how was it possible <i>not</i> to? He
lifted his lashes and sought Ida’s eyes. She was playing
with her watch-chain, and nodded to him in her usual honest,
crabbed way. He would have liked to cling to her and have
her take him away; to hear nothing but her low, soothing
voice, saying “There, little Hanno, be quiet, you need not say
it.”</p>

<p>“Well, my son, let us hear it,” said the Senator, shortly.
He had sat down in an easy-chair by the table and was
waiting. He did not smile—he seldom did on such
occasions. Very serious, with one eyebrow lifted, he
measured little Hanno with cold and scrutinizing glance.</p>

<p>Hanno straightened up. He rubbed one hand over the
piano’s polished surface, gave a shy look at the company,
and, somewhat emboldened by the gentle looks of Grandmamma
and Aunt Tony, brought out, in a low, almost a hard
voice: “‘The Shepherd’s Sunday Hymn,’ by Uhland.”</p>

<p>“Oh, my dear child, not like that,” called out the Senator.
“Don’t stick there by the piano and cross your hands
on your tummy like that! Stand up! Speak out! That’s
the first thing. Here, stand here between the curtains.
Now, hold your head up—let your arms hang down quietly at
your sides.”</p>

<p>Hanno took up his position on the threshold of the living-room
and let his arms hang down. Obediently he raised his
head, but his eyes—the lashes drooped so low that they
were invisible. They were probably already swimming in
tears.</p>

<p class="center">“‘This is the day of our—’”</p>

<p>he began, very low. His father’s voice sounded loud by contrast
when he interrupted: “One begins with a bow, my son.
And then, much louder. Begin again, please: ‘Shepherd’s
Sunday Hymn’—”</p>

<p>It was cruel. The Senator was probably aware that he was
robbing the child of the last remnant of his self-control.
But the boy should not let himself be robbed. He should
have more manliness by now. “‘Shepherd’s Sunday
Hymn,’” he repeated encouragingly, remorselessly.</p>

<p>But it was all up with Hanno. His head sank on his
breast, and the small, blue-veined right hand tugged spasmodically
at the brocaded portière.</p>

<p class="center">“‘I stand alone on the vacant plain,’”</p>

<p>he said, but could get no further. The mood of the verse
possessed him. An overmastering self-pity took away his
voice, and the tears could not be kept back: they rolled
out from beneath his lashes. Suddenly the thought came
into his mind: if he were only ill, a little ill, as on
those nights when he lay in bed with a slight fever and sore
throat, and Ida came and gave him a drink, and put a
compress on his head, and was kind— He put his head
down on the arm with which he clung to the portière, and
sobbed.</p>

<p>“Well,” said the Senator, harshly, “there is no pleasure in
that.” He stood up, irritated. “What are you crying about?
Though it is certainly a good enough reason for tears, that
you haven’t the courage to do anything, even for the sake of
giving me a little pleasure! Are you a little girl? What
will become of you if you go on like that? Will you always
be drowning yourself in tears, every time you have to speak
to people?”</p>

<p>“I never <i>will</i> speak to people, never!” thought Hanno in
despair.</p>

<p>“Think it over till this afternoon,” finished the Senator, and
went into the dining-room. Ida Jungmann knelt by her
fledgling and dried his eyes, and spoke to him, half consoling,
half reproachful.</p>

<p>The Senator breakfasted hurriedly, and the Frau Consul,
Tony, Clothilde, and Christian meanwhile took their leave.
They were to dine with Gerda, as likewise were the Krögers,
the Weinschenks, and the three Misses Buddenbrook from
Broad Street, while the Senator, willy-nilly, must be present
at the dinner in the Ratskeller. He hoped to leave in time
to see his family again at his own house.</p>

<p>Sitting at the be-garlanded table, he drank his hot tea out
of a saucer, hurriedly ate an egg, and on the steps took two or
three puffs of a cigarette. Grobleben, wearing his woollen
scarf in defiance of the July heat, with a boot over his left
forearm and the polish-brush in his right, a long drop
pendent from his nose, came from the garden into the front
entry and accosted his master at the foot of the stairs, where
the brown bear stood with his tray.</p>

<p>“Many happy returns, Herr Sen’ter, many happy—’n’ one
is rich ’n’ great, ’n’ t’other’s pore—”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, Grobleben, you’re right, that’s just how it is!”
And the Senator slipped a piece of money into the hand
with the brush, and crossed the entry into the anteroom of
the office. In the office the cashier came up to him, a tall man
with honest, faithful eyes, to convey, in carefully selected
phrases, the good wishes of the staff. The Senator thanked
him in a few words, and went on to his place by the window.
He had hardly opened his letters and glanced into the morning
paper lying there ready for him, when a knock came on
the door leading into the front entry, and the first visitors
appeared with their congratulations.</p>

<p>It was a delegation of granary labourers, who came
straddling in like bears, the corners of their mouths drawn
down with befitting solemnity and their caps in their hands.
Their spokesman spat tobacco-juice on the floor, pulled
up his trousers, and talked in great excitement about “a
hun’erd year” and “many more hun’erd year.” The Senator
proposed to them a considerable increase in their pay for
the week, and dismissed them. The office staff of the revenue
department came in a body to congratulate their chief. As
they left, they met in the doorway a number of sailors, with
two pilots at the head, from the “Wullenwewer” and the
“Friederike Överdieck,” the two ships belonging to the firm
which happened at the time to be in port. Then there was a
deputation of grain-porters, in black blouses, knee-breeches,
and top-hats. And single citizens, too, were announced from
time to time: Herr Stuht from Bell-Founders’ Street came,
with a black coat over his flannel shirt, and Iwersen the
florist, and sundry other neighbours. There was an old postman,
with watery eyes, earrings, and a white beard—an ancient
oddity whom the Senator used to salute on the street and
call him Herr Postmaster: he came, stood in the doorway, and
cried out “Ah bain’t come fer <i>that</i>, Herr Sen’ter! Ah knows
as iverybody gits summat as comes here to-day, but ah bain’t
come fer that, an’ so ah tells ye!” He received his piece of
money with gratitude, none the less. There was simply no
end to it. At half-past ten the servant came from the house
to announce that the Frau Senator was receiving guests in
the salon.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook left his office and hurried upstairs.
At the door of the salon he paused a moment for a glance
into the mirror to order his cravat, and to refresh himself
with a whiff of the eau-de-cologne on his handkerchief. His
body was wet with perspiration, but his face was pale, his
hands and feet cold. The reception in the office had nearly
used him up already. He drew a long breath and entered the
sunlit room, to be greeted at once by Consul Huneus, the
lumber dealer and multi-millionaire, his wife, their daughter,
and the latter’s husband, Senator Dr. Gieseke. These had all
driven in from Travemünde, like many others of the first
families of the town, who were spending July in a cure which
they interrupted only for the Buddenbrook jubilee.</p>

<p>They had not been sitting for three minutes in the elegant
arm-chairs of the salon when Consul Överdieck, son of the
deceased Burgomaster, and his wife, who was a Kistenmaker,
were announced. When Consul Huneus made his adieux,
his place was taken by his brother, who had a million less
money than he, but made up for it by being a senator.</p>

<p>Now the ball was open. The tall white door, with the
relief of the singing cupids above it, was scarcely closed for
a moment; there was a constant view from within of the great
staircase, upon which the light streamed down from the skylight
far above, and of the stairs themselves, full of guests
either entering or taking their leave. But the salon was
spacious, the guests lingered in groups to talk, and the number
of those who came was for some time far greater than the
number of those who went away. Soon the maid-servant
gave up opening and shutting the door that led into the salon
and left it wide open, so that the guests stood in the corridor
as well. There was the drone and buzz of conversation in
masculine and feminine voices, there were handshakings, bows,
jests, and loud, jolly laughter, which reverberated among the
columns of the staircase and echoed from the great glass panes
of the skylight. Senator Buddenbrook stood by turns at the
top of the stairs and in the bow-window, receiving the congratulations,
which were sometimes mere formal murmurs and
sometimes loud and hearty expressions of good will. Burgomaster
Dr. Langhals, a heavily built man of elegant appearance,
with a shaven chin nestling in a white neck-cloth, short
grey mutton-chops, and a languid diplomatic air, was received
with general marks of respect. Consul Eduard Kistenmaker,
the wine-merchant, his wife, who was a Möllendorpf, and his
brother and partner Stephan, Senator Buddenbrook’s loyal
friend and supporter, with his wife, the rudely healthy daughter
of a landed proprietor, arrive and pay their respects. The
widowed Frau Senator Möllendorpf sits throned in the centre
of the sofa in the salon, while her children, Consul August
Möllendorpf and his wife Julchen, born Hagenström, mingle
with the crowd. Consul Hermann Hagenström supports his
considerable weight on the balustrade, breathes heavily into
his red beard, and talks with Senator Dr. Cremer, the Chief of
Police, whose brown beard, mixed with grey, frames a smiling
face expressive of a sort of gentle slyness. State Attorney
Moritz Hagenström, smiling and showing his defective teeth,
is there with his beautiful wife, the former Fräulein Puttfarken
of Hamburg. Good old Dr. Grabow may be seen
pressing Senator Buddenbrook’s hand for a moment in both
of his, to be displaced next moment by Contractor Voigt. Pastor
Pringsheim, in secular garb, only betraying his dignity by
the length of his frock-coat, comes up the steps with outstretched
arms and a beaming face. And Herr Friedrich Wilhelm
Marcus is present, of course. Those gentlemen who
come as delegates from any body such as the Senate, the Board
of Trade, or the Assembly of Burgesses, appear in frock-coats.
It is half-past eleven. The heat is intense. The lady of the
house withdrew a quarter of an hour ago.</p>

<p>Suddenly there is a hubbub below the vestibule door, a
stamping and shuffling of feet, as of many people entering together;
and a ringing, noisy voice echoes through the whole
house. Everybody rushes to the landing, blocks up the doors
to the salon, the dining-room, and the smoking-room, and
peers down. Below is a group of fifteen or twenty men with
musical instruments, headed by a gentleman in a brown wig,
with a grey nautical beard and yellow artificial teeth, which he
shows when he talks. What is happening? It is Consul
Peter Döhlmann, of course: he is bringing the band from the
theatre, and mounts the stairs in triumph, swinging a packet of
programmes in his hand!</p>

<p>The serenade in honour of the hundredth anniversary of the
firm of Johann Buddenbrook begins: in these impossible conditions,
with the notes all running together, the chords drowning
each other, the loud grunting and snarling of the big bass
trumpet heard above everything else. It begins with “Now
let us all thank God,” goes over into the adaptation of Offenbach’s
“La Belle Hélène,” and winds up with a <i>pot-pourri</i> of
folk-songs—quite an extensive programme! And a pretty
idea of Döhlmann’s! They congratulate him on it; and nobody
feels inclined to break up until the concert is finished.
They stand or sit in the salon and the corridor; they listen and
talk.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook stood with Stephan Kistenmaker,
Senator Dr. Gieseke, and Contractor Voigt, beyond the staircase,
near the open door of the smoking-room and the flight of
stairs up to the second storey. He leaned against the wall,
now and then contributing a word to the conversation, and for
the rest looking out into space across the balustrade. It was
hotter than ever, and more oppressive; but it would probably
rain. To judge from the shadows that drove across the skylight
there must be clouds in the sky. They were so many and
moved so rapidly that the changeful, flickering light on the
staircase came in time to hurt the eyes. Every other minute
the brilliance of the gilt chandelier and the brass instruments
below was quenched, to blaze out the next minute as before.
Once the shadows lasted a little longer, and six or seven times
something fell with a slight crackling sound upon the panes
of the skylight—hail-stones, no doubt. Then the sunlight
streamed down again.</p>

<p>There is a mood of depression in which everything that
would ordinarily irritate us and call up a healthy reaction,
merely weighs us down with a nameless, heavy burden of dull
chagrin. Thus Thomas brooded over the break-down of
little Johann, over the feelings which the whole celebration
aroused in him, and still more over those which he would
have liked to feel but could not. He sought again and again
to pull himself together, to clear his countenance, to tell
himself that this was a great day which was bound to heighten
and exhilarate his mood. And indeed the noise which the
band was making, the buzz of voices, the sight of all these
people gathered in his honour, did shake his nerves; did,
together with his memories of the past and of his father, give
rise in him to a sort of weak emotionalism. But a sense of
the ridiculous, of the disagreeable, hung over it all—the
trumpery music, spoiled by the bad acoustics, the banal
company chattering about dinners and the stock market—and
this very mingling of emotion and disgust heightened his
inward sense of exhaustion and despair.</p>

<p>At a quarter after twelve, when the musical program
was drawing to a close, an incident occurred which in no
wise interfered with the prevailing good feeling, but which
obliged the master of the house to leave his guests for a short
time. It was of a business nature. At a pause in the music
the youngest apprentice in the firm appeared, coming up the
great staircase, overcome with embarrassment at sight of so
many people. He was a little, stunted fellow; and he drew
his red face down as far as possible between his shoulders and
swung one long, thin arm violently back and forth to show
that he was perfectly at his ease. In the other hand he had a
telegram. He mounted the steps, looking everywhere for his
master, and when he had discovered him he passed with
blushes and murmured excuses through the crowds that
blocked his way.</p>

<p>His blushes were superfluous—nobody saw him. Without
looking at him or breaking off their talk, they slightly made
way, and they hardly noticed when he gave his telegram to
the Senator, with a scrape, and the latter turned a little away
from Kistenmaker, Voigt, and Gieseke to read it. Nearly all
the telegrams that came to-day were messages of congratulation;
still, during business hours, they had to be delivered
at once.</p>

<p>The corridor made a bend at the point where the stairs
mounted to the second storey, and then went on to the back
stairs, where there was another, a side entrance into the
dining-room. Opposite the stairs was the shaft of the dumbwaiter,
and at this point there was a sizable table, where the
maids usually polished the silver. The Senator paused here,
turned his back to the apprentice, and opened the dispatch.</p>

<p>Suddenly his eyes opened so wide that any one seeing him
would have started in astonishment, and he gave a deep, gasping
intake of breath which dried his throat and made him
cough.</p>

<p>He tried to say “Very well,” but his voice was inaudible
in the clamour behind him. “Very well,” he repeated; but
the second word was only a whisper.</p>

<p>As his master did not move or turn round or make any
sign, the hump-backed apprentice shifted from one foot to
the other, then made his outlandish scrape again and went
down the back stairs.</p>

<p>Senator Buddenbrook still stood at the table. His hands,
holding the dispatch, hung weakly down in front of him; he
breathed in difficult, short breaths through his mouth; his
body swayed back and forth, and he shook his head meaninglessly,
as if stunned. “That little bit of hail,” he said,
“that little bit of hail.” He repeated it stupidly. But
gradually his breathing grew longer and quieter, the movement
of his body less; his half-shut eyes clouded over with
a weary, broken expression, and he turned around, slowly
nodding his head, opened the door into the dining-room, and
went in. With bent head he crossed the wide polished floor
and sat down on one of the dark-red sofas by the window.
Here it was quiet and cool. The sound of the fountain came
up from the garden, and a fly buzzed on the pane. There
was only a dull murmur from the front of the house.</p>

<p>He laid his weary head on the cushion and closed his eyes.
“That’s good, that’s good,” he muttered, half aloud, drawing
a deep breath of relief and satisfaction; “Oh, that <i>is</i> good!”</p>

<p>He lay five minutes thus, with limbs relaxed and a look
of peace upon his face. Then he sat up, folded the telegram,
put it in his breast pocket, and rose to rejoin his guests.</p>

<p>But in the same minute he sank back with a disgusted
groan upon the sofa. The music—it was beginning again;
an idiotic racket, meant to be a galop, with the drum and
cymbals marking a rhythm in which the other instruments all
joined either ahead of or behind time; a naïve, insistent,
intolerable hullabaloo of snarling, crashing, and feebly piping
noises, punctuated by the silly tootling of the piccolo.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">Oh</span>, Bach, Sebastian Bach, dear lady!” cried Edmund
Pfühl, Herr Edmund Pfühl, the organist of St. Mary’s, as
he strode up and down the salon with great activity, while
Gerda, smiling, her head on her hand, sat at the piano; and
Hanno listened from a big chair, his hands clasped round
his knees. “Certainly, as you say, it was he through whom
the victory was achieved by harmony over counterpoint.
He invented modern harmony, assuredly. But how? Need
I tell you how? By progressive development of the contrapuntal
style—you know it as well as I do. Harmony? Ah,
no! By no means. Counterpoint, my dear lady, counterpoint!
Whither, I ask you, would experiments in harmony
have led? While I have breath to speak, I will warn you
against mere experiments in harmony!”</p>

<p>His zeal as he spoke was great, and he gave it free rein,
for he felt at home in the house. Every Wednesday afternoon
there appeared on the threshold his bulky, square,
high-shouldered figure, in a coffee-coloured coat, whereof
the skirts hung down over his knees. While awaiting his
partner, he would open lovingly the Bechstein grand piano,
arrange the violin parts on the stand, and then prelude a
little, softly and artistically, with his head sunk, in high
contentment, on one shoulder.</p>

<p>An astonishing growth of hair, a wilderness of tight little
curls, red-brown mixed with grey, made his head look big and
heavy, though it was poised easily upon a long neck with an
extremely large Adam’s apple that showed above his low
collar. The straight, bunchy moustaches, of the same colour
as the hair, were more prominent than the small snub nose.
His eyes were brown and bright, with puffs of flesh beneath
them; when he played they looked as though their gaze
passed through whatever was in their way and rested on the
other side. His face was not striking, but it had at least
the stamp of a strong and lively intelligence. His eyelids
were usually half drooped, and he had a way of relaxing
his lower jaw without opening his mouth, which gave him a
flabby, resigned expression like that sometimes seen on the
face of a sleeping person.</p>

<p>The softness of his outward seeming, however, contrasted
strongly with the actual strength and self-respect of his character.
Edmund Pfühl was an organist of no small repute,
whose reputation for contrapuntal learning was not confined
within the walls of his native town. His little book on
Church Music was recommended for private study in several
conservatories, and his fugues and chorals were played now
and then where an organ sounded to the glory of
God. These compositions, as well as the voluntaries he
played on Sundays at Saint Mary’s, were flawless, impeccable,
full of the relentless, severe logicality of the <i>Strenge Satz</i>.
Such beauty as they had was not of this earth, and made no
appeal to the ordinary layman’s human feeling. What spoke
in them, what gloriously triumphed in them, was a technique
amounting to an ascetic religion, a technique elevated to a
lofty sacrament, to an absolute end in itself. Edmund
Pfühl had small use for the pleasant and the agreeable, and
spoke of melody, it must be confessed, in slighting terms.
But he was no dry pedant, notwithstanding. He would utter
the name of Palestrina in the most dogmatic, awe-inspiring
tone. But even while he made his instrument give out a succession
of archaistic virtuosities, his face would be all aglow
with feeling, with rapt enthusiasm, and his gaze would rest
upon the distance as though he saw there the ultimate
logicality of all events, issuing in reality. This was the
musician’s look; vague and vacant precisely because it abode
in the kingdom of a purer, profounder, more absolute logic
than that which shapes our verbal conceptions and thoughts.</p>

<p>His hands were large and soft, apparently boneless, and
covered with freckles. His voice, when he greeted Gerda
Buddenbrook, was low and hollow, as though a bite were
stuck in his throat: “Good morning, honoured lady!”</p>

<p>He rose a little from his seat, bowed, and respectfully took
the hand she offered, while with his own left he struck the
fifths on the piano, so firmly and clear that she seized her
Stradivarius and began to tune the strings with practised
ear.</p>

<p>“The G minor concerto of Bach, Herr Pfühl. The whole
adagio still goes badly, I think.”</p>

<p>And the organist began to play. But hardly were the first
chords struck, when it invariably happened that the corridor
door would open gently, and without a sound little Johann
would steal across the carpet to an easy-chair, where he would
sit, his hands clasped round his knees, motionless, and listen
to the music and the conversation.</p>

<p>“Well, Hanno, so you want a little taste of music,
do you?” said Gerda in a pause, and looked at her son with
her shadowy eyes, in which the music had kindled a soft
radiance.</p>

<p>Then he would stand up and put out his hand to Herr
Pfühl with a silent bow, and Herr Pfühl would stroke with
gentle affection the soft light-brown hair that hung gracefully
about brow and temples.</p>

<p>“Listen, now, my child,” he would say, with mild impressiveness;
and the boy would look at the Adam’s apple
that went up and down as the organist spoke, and then go back
to his place with his quick, light steps, as though he
could hardly wait for the music to begin again.</p>

<p>They played a movement of Haydn, some pages of Mozart,
a sonata of Beethoven. Then, while Gerda was picking out
some music, with her violin under her arm, a surprising thing
happened: Herr Pfühl, Edmund Pfühl, organist at St.
Mary’s, glided over from his easy interlude into music of
an extraordinary style; while a sort of shame-faced enjoyment
showed upon his absent countenance. A burgeoning
and blooming, a weaving and singing rose beneath his fingers;
then, softly and dreamily at first, but ever clearer and clearer,
there emerged in artistic counterpoint the ancestral, grandiose,
magnificent march motif—a mounting to a climax, a complication,
a transition; and at the resolution of the dominant
the violin chimed in, fortissimo. It was the overture to <i>Die
Meistersinger</i>.</p>

<p>Gerda Buddenbrook was an impassioned Wagnerite. But
Herr Pfühl was an equally impassioned opponent—so much
so that in the beginning she had despaired of winning him
over.</p>

<p>On the day when she first laid some piano arrangements
from <i>Tristan</i> on the music-rack, he played some twenty-five
beats and then sprung up from the music-stool to stride up and
down the room with disgust painted upon his face.</p>

<p>“I cannot play that, my dear lady! I am your most
devoted servant—but I cannot. That is not music—believe
me! I have always flattered myself I knew something about
music—but this is chaos! This is demagogy, blasphemy,
insanity, madness! It is a perfumed-fog, shot through with
lightning! It is the end of all honesty in art. I will not play
it!” And with the words he had thrown himself again on
the stool, and with his Adam’s apple working furiously up
and down, with coughs and sighs, had accomplished another
twenty-five beats. But then he shut the piano and cried
out:</p>

<p>“Oh, fie, fie! No, this is going too far. Forgive me, dear
lady, if I speak frankly what I feel. You have honoured me
for years, and paid me for my services; and I am a man of
modest means. But I must lay down my office, I assure you,
if you drive me to it by asking me to play these atrocities!
Look, the child sits there listening—would you then utterly
corrupt his soul?”</p>

<p>But let him gesture as furiously as he would, she brought
him over—slowly, by easy stages, by persistent playing and
persuasion.</p>

<p>“Pfühl,” she would say, “be reasonable, take the thing
calmly. You are put off by his original use of harmony.
Beethoven seems to you so pure, clear, and natural, by
contrast. But remember how Beethoven himself affronted his
contemporaries, who were brought up in the old way. And
Bach—why, good Heavens, you know how he was reproached
for his want of melody and clearness! You talk about
honesty—but what do you mean by honesty in art? Is it
not the antithesis of hedonism? And, if so, then that is
what you have here. Just as much as in Bach. I tell you,
Pfühl, this music is less foreign to your inner self than you
think!”</p>

<p>“It is all juggling and sophistry—begging your pardon,”
he grumbled. But she was right, after all: the music was
not so impossible as he thought at first. He never, it is true,
quite reconciled himself to <i>Tristan</i>, though he eventually
carried out Gerda’s wish and made a very clever
arrangement of the Liebestod for violin and piano. He was
first won over by certain parts of <i>Die Meistersinger</i>; and
slowly a love for this new art began to stir within him. He
would not confess it—he was himself aghast at the fact, and
would pettishly deny it when the subject was mentioned.
But after the old masters had had their due, Gerda no longer
needed to urge him to respond to a more complex demand
upon his virtuosity; with an expression of shame-faced
pleasure, he would glide into the weaving harmonies of the
<i>Leit-motiv</i>. After the music, however, there would be a
long explanation of the relation of this style of music to that
of the <i>Strenge Satz</i>; and one day Herr Pfühl admitted that,
while not personally interested in the theme, he saw himself
obliged to add a chapter to his book on Church Music, the
subject of which would be the application of the old key-system
to the church- and folk-music of Richard Wagner.</p>

<p>Hanno sat quite still, his small hands clasped round his
knees, his mouth, as usual, a little twisted as his tongue felt
out the hole in a back tooth. He watched his mother and
Herr Pfühl with large quiet eyes; and thus, so early, he
became aware of music as an extraordinarily serious,
important, and profound thing in life. He understood only
now and then what they were saying, and the music itself was
mostly far above his childish understanding. Yet he came
again, and sat absorbed for hours—a feat which surely faith,
love, and reverence alone enabled him to perform.</p>

<p>When only seven, he began to repeat with one hand on the
piano certain combinations of sound that made an impression
on him. His mother watched him smiling, improved his
chords, and showed him how certain tones would be necessary
to carry one chord over into another. And his ear confirmed
what she told him.</p>

<p>After Gerda Buddenbrook had watched her son a little, she
decided that he must have piano lessons.</p>

<p>“I hardly think,” she told Herr Pfühl, “that he is suited
for solo work; and on the whole I am glad, for it has its bad
side apart from the dependence of the soloist upon his accompanist,
which can be very serious too;—if I did not have
you, for instance!—there is always the danger of yielding to
more or less complete virtuosity. You see, I know whereof
I speak. I tell you frankly that, for the soloist, a high
degree of ability is only the first step. The concentration
on the tone and phrasing of the treble, which reduces the
whole polyphony to something vague and indefinite in the
consciousness, must surely spoil the feeling for harmony—unless
the person is more than usually gifted—and the memory
as well, which is most difficult to correct later on. I love
my violin, and I have accomplished a good deal with it; but
to tell the truth, I place the piano higher. What I mean is
this: familiarity with the piano, as a means of summarizing
the richest and most varied structures, as an incomparable
instrument for musical reproduction, means for me a clearer,
more intimate and comprehensive intercourse with music.
Listen, Pfühl. I would like to have you take him, if you will
be so good. I know there are two or three people here in the
town who give lessons—women, I think. But they are simply
piano-teachers. You know what I mean. I feel that it
matters so little whether one is trained upon an instrument,
and so much whether one knows something about music. I
depend upon you. And you will see, you will succeed with
him. He has the Buddenbrook hand. The Buddenbrooks
can all strike the ninths and tenths—only they have never set
any store by it,” she concluded, laughing. And Herr Pfühl
declared himself ready to undertake the lessons.</p>

<p>From now on, he came on Mondays as well as Wednesdays,
and gave little Hanno lessons, while Gerda sat beside them.
He went at it in an unusual way, for he felt that he owed
more to his pupil’s dumb and passionate zeal than merely to
employ it in playing the piano a little. The first elementary
difficulties were hardly got over when he began to
theorize, in a simple way, with graphic illustrations, and
to give his pupil the foundations of the theory of harmony.
And Hanno understood. For it was all only a confirmation of
what he had always known.</p>

<p>As far as possible, Herr Pfühl took into consideration the
eager ambition of the child. He spent much thought upon
the problem, how best to lighten the material load that
weighed down the wings of his fancy. He did not demand
too much finger dexterity or practice of scales. What he had
in mind, and soon achieved, was a clear and lively grasp of
the key-system on Hanno’s part, an inward, comprehensive
understanding of its relationships, out of which would come,
at no distant day, the quick eye for possible combinations, the
intuitive mastery over the piano, which would lead to improvisation
and composition. He appreciated with a touching
delicacy of feeling the spiritual needs of this young
pupil, who had already heard so much, and directed it
toward the acquisition of a serious style. He would not disillusionize
the deep solemnity of his mood by making him
practise commonplaces. He gave him chorals to play, and
pointed out the laws controlling the development of one chord
into another.</p>

<p>Gerda, sitting with her embroidery or her book, just
beyond the portières, followed the course of the lessons.</p>

<p>“You outstrip all my expectations,” she told Herr Pfühl,
later on. “But are you not going too fast? Aren’t you
getting too far ahead? Your method seems to me eminently
creative—he has already begun to try to improvise a little.
But if the method is beyond him, if he hasn’t enough gift,
he will learn absolutely nothing.”</p>

<p>“He has enough gift,” Herr Pfühl said, and nodded.
“Sometimes I look into his eyes, and see so much lying there—but
he holds his mouth tight shut. In later life, when his
mouth will probably be shut even tighter, he must have some
kind of outlet—a way of speaking—”</p>

<p>She looked at him—at this square-built musician with the
red-brown hair, the pouches under the eyes, the bushy moustaches,
and the inordinate Adam’s apple—and then she put
out her hand and said: “Thank you, Pfühl. You mean
well by him. And who knows, yet, how much you are doing
for him?”</p>

<p>Hanno’s feeling for his teacher was one of boundless
gratitude and devotion. At school he sat heavy and hopeless,
unable, despite strenuous coaching, to understand his tables.
But he grasped without effort all that Herr Pfühl told him,
and made it his own—if he could make more his own that
which he had already owned before. Edmund Pfühl, like a
stout angel in a tail-coat, took him in his arms every Monday
afternoon and transported him above all his daily misery,
into the mild, sweet, grave, consoling kingdom of sound.</p>

<p>The lessons sometimes took place at Herr Pfühl’s own
house, a roomy old gabled dwelling full of cool passages
and crannies, in which the organist lived alone with an elderly
housekeeper. Sometimes, too, little Buddenbrook was
allowed to sit up with the organist at the Sunday service in
St. Mary’s—which was quite a different matter from stopping
below with the other people, in the nave. High above the
congregation, high above Pastor Pringsheim in his pulpit,
the two sat alone, in the midst of a mighty tempest of rolling
sound, which at once set them free from the earth and
dominated them by its own power; and Hanno was sometimes
blissfully permitted to help his master control the stops.</p>

<p>When the choral was finished, Herr Pfühl would slowly lift
his fingers from the keyboard, so that only the bass and the
fundamental would still be heard, in lingering solemnity;
and after a meaningful pause, the well-modulated voice of
Pastor Pringsheim would rise up from under the sounding-board
in the pulpit. Then it happened not infrequently that
Herr Pfühl would, quite simply, begin to make fun of the
preacher: his artificial enunciation, his long, exaggerated
vowels, his sighs, his crude transitions from sanctity to gloom.
Hanno would laugh too, softly but with heart-felt glee; for
those two up there were both of the opinion—which neither
of them expressed—that the sermon was silly twaddle, and
that the real service consisted in that which the Pastor and
his congregation regarded merely as a devotional accessory:
namely, the music.</p>

<p>Herr Pfühl, in fact, had a constant grievance in the small
understanding there was for his accomplishments down
there among the Senators, Consuls, citizens, and their families.
And thus, he liked to have his small pupil by him, to
whom he could point out the extraordinary difficulties of the
passages he had just played. He performed marvels of
technique. He had composed a melody which was just the
same read forward or backward, and based upon it a fugue
which was to be played “crab-fashion.” But after performing
this wonder: “Nobody knows the difference,” he said, and
folded his hands in his lap with a dreary look, shaking his
head hopelessly. While Pastor Pringsheim was delivering his
sermon, he whispered to Hanno: “That was a crab-fashion
imitation, Johann. You don’t know what that is yet. It is
the imitation of a theme composed backward instead of forward—a
very, very difficult thing. Later on, I will show
you what an imitation in the <i>Strenge Satz</i> involves. As for
the ‘crab,’ I would never ask you to try that. It isn’t
necessary. But do not believe those who tell you that such
things are trifles, without any musical value. You will find
the crab in musicians of all ages. But exercises like that are
the scorn of the mediocre and the superficial musician.
Humility, Hanno, <i>humility</i>—is the feeling one should have.
Don’t forget it.”</p>

<p>On his eighth birthday, April 15th, 1869, Hanno played
before the assembled family a fantasy of his own composition.
It was a simple affair, a motif entirely of his own invention,
which he had slightly developed. When he showed it to
Herr Pfühl, the organist, of course, had some criticism to
make.</p>

<p>“What sort of theatrical ending is that, Johann? It
doesn’t go with the rest of it. In the beginning it is all
pretty good; but why do you suddenly fall from B major
into the six-four chord on the fourth note with a minor third?
These are tricks; and you tremolo here, too—where did you
pick that up? I know, of course: you have been listening
when I played certain things for your mother. Change the
end, child: then it will be quite a clean little piece of work.”</p>

<p>But it appeared that Hanno laid the greatest stress precisely
on this minor chord and this finale; and his mother
was so very pleased with it that it remained as it was. She
took her violin and played the upper part, and varied it
with runs in demi-semi-quavers. That sounded gorgeous:
Hanno kissed her out of sheer happiness, and they played it
together to the family on the 15th of April.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul, Frau Permaneder, Christian, Clothilde,
Herr and Frau Consul Kröger, Herr and Frau Director Weinschenk,
the Broad Street Buddenbrooks, and Therese Weichbrodt
were all bidden to dinner at four o’clock, with the
Senator and his wife, in honour of Hanno’s birthday; and
now they sat in the salon and looked at the child, perched
on the music-stool in his sailor suit, and at the elegant, foreign
appearance his mother made as she played a wonderful
cantilena on the G string, and then, with profound virtuosity,
developed a stream of purling, foaming cadences.
The silver on the end of her bow gleamed in the gas-light.</p>

<p>Hanno was pale with excitement, and had hardly eaten any
dinner. But now he forgot all else in his absorbed devotion
to his task, which would, alas, be all over in ten minutes!
The little melody he had invented was more harmonic than
rhythmic in its structure; there was an extraordinary contrast
between the simple primitive material which the child had at
his command, and the impressive, impassioned, almost over-refined
method with which that material was employed. He
brought out each leading note with a forward inclination of
the little head; he sat far forward on the music-stool, and
strove by the use of both pedals to give each new harmony an
emotional value. In truth, when Hanno concentrated
upon an effect, the result was likely to be emotional rather
than merely sentimental. He gave every simple harmonic
device a special and mysterious significance by means of
retardation and accentuation; his surprising skill in effects
was displayed in each chord, each new harmony, by a
suddenly introduced pianissimo. And he sat with lifted eyebrows,
swaying back and forth with the whole upper part of
his body. Then came the finale, Hanno’s beloved finale,
which crowned the elevated simplicity of the whole piece.
Soft and clear as a bell sounded the E minor chord, tremolo
pianissimo, amid the purling, flowing notes of the violin.
It swelled, it broadened, it slowly, slowly rose: suddenly,
in the forte, he introduced the discord C sharp, which led
back to the original key, and the Stradivarius ornamented it
with its welling and singing. He dwelt on the dissonance
until it became fortissimo. But he denied himself and his
audience the resolution; he kept it back. What would it be,
this resolution, this enchanting, satisfying absorption into the
B major chord? A joy beyond compare, a gratification of
overpowering sweetness! Peace! Bliss! The kingdom of
Heaven: only not yet—not yet! A moment more of striving,
hesitation, suspense, that must become well-nigh intolerable in
order to heighten the ultimate moment of joy.—Once more—a
last, a final tasting of this striving and yearning, this
craving of the entire being, this last forcing of the will to
deny oneself the fulfilment and the conclusion, in the knowledge
that joy, when it comes, lasts only for the moment. The
whole upper part of Hanno’s little body straightened, his eyes
grew larger, his closed lips trembled, he breathed short, spasmodic
breaths through his nose. At last, at last, joy would no
longer be denied. It came, it poured over him; he resisted no
more. His muscles relaxed, his head sank weakly on his
shoulder, his eyes closed, and a pathetic, almost an anguished
smile of speechless rapture hovered about his mouth; while
his tremolo, among the rippling and rustling runs from the
violin, to which he now added runs in the bass, glided over
into B major, swelled up suddenly into forte, and after one
brief, resounding burst, broke off.</p>

<p>It was impossible that all the effect which this had upon
Hanno should pass over into his audience. Frau Permaneder,
for instance, had not the slightest idea what it was all about.
But she had seen the child’s smile, the rhythm of his body,
the beloved little head swaying enraptured from side to side—and
the sight had penetrated to the depths of her easily
moved nature.</p>

<p>“How the child can play! Oh, how he can play!” she
cried, hurrying to him half-weeping and folding him in her
arms. “Gerda, Tom, he will be a Meyerbeer, a Mozart, a—”
As no third name of equal significance occurred to her, she
confined herself to showering kisses on her nephew, who sat
there, still quite exhausted, with an absent look in his eyes.</p>

<p>“That’s enough, Tony,” the Senator said softly. “Please
don’t put such ideas into the child’s head.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Thomas Buddenbrook</span> was, in his heart, far from pleased
with the development of little Johann.</p>

<p>Long ago he had led Gerda Arnoldsen to the altar, and
all the Philistines had shaken their heads. He had felt strong
and bold enough then to display a distinguished taste
without harming his position as a citizen. But now, the long-awaited
heir, who showed so many physical traits of the
paternal inheritance—did he, after all, belong entirely to the
mother’s side? He had hoped that one day his son would
take up the work of the father’s lifetime in his stronger,
more fortunate hands, and carry it forward. But now it
almost seemed that the son was hostile, not only to the surroundings
and the life in which his lot was cast, but even to
his father as well.</p>

<p>Gerda’s violin-playing had always added to her strange
eyes, which he loved, to her heavy, dark-red hair and her
whole exotic appearance, one charm the more. But now that
he saw how her passion for music, strange to his own nature,
utterly, even at this early age, possessed the child, he felt in
it a hostile force that came between him and his son,
of whom his hopes would make a Buddenbrook—a strong and
practical-minded man, with definite impulses after power and
conquest. In his present irritable state it seemed to him
that this hostile force was making him a stranger in his own
house.</p>

<p>He could not, himself, approach any nearer to the music
practised by Gerda and her friend Herr Pfühl; Gerda herself,
exclusive and impatient where her art was concerned, made it
cruelly hard for him.</p>

<p>Never had he dreamed that music was so essentially foreign
to his family as now it seemed. His grandfather had enjoyed
playing the flute, and he himself always listened with
pleasure to melodies that possessed a graceful charm, a lively
swing, or a tender melancholy. But if he happened to express
his liking for any such composition, Gerda would be sure to
shrug her shoulders and say with a pitying smile, “How
can you, my friend? A thing like that, without any musical
value whatever!”</p>

<p>He hated this “musical value.” It was a phrase which
had no meaning for him save a certain chilling arrogance.
It drove him on, in Hanno’s presence, to self-assertion. More
than once he remonstrated angrily, “This constant harping
on musical values, my dear, strikes me as rather tasteless
and opinionated.” To which she rejoined: “Thomas, once
for all, you will never understand anything about music as
an art, and, intelligent as you are, you will never see that
it is more than an after-dinner pleasure and a feast for the
ears. In every other field you have a perception of the
banal—in music not. But it is the test of musical comprehension.
What pleases you in music? A sort of insipid
optimism, which, if you met with it in literature, would make
you throw down the book with an angry or sarcastic comment.
Easy gratification of each unformed wish, prompt satisfaction
before the will is even roused—that is what pretty
music is like—and it is like nothing else in the world. It
is mere flabby idealism.”</p>

<p>He understood her; that is, he understood what she
said. But he could not follow her: could not comprehend
why melodies which touched or stirred him were cheap and
worthless, while compositions which left him cold and
bewildered possessed the highest musical value. He stood
before a temple from whose threshold Gerda sternly waved
him back—and he watched while she and the child vanished
within.</p>

<p>He betrayed none of his grief over this estrangement,
though the gulf seemed to widen between him and his little
son. The idea of suing for his child’s favour seemed frightful
to him. During the day he had small time to spare; at
meals he treated him with a friendly cordiality that had at
times a tonic severity. “Well, comrade,” he would say,
giving him a tap or two on the back of the head and seating
himself opposite his wife, “well, and how are you? Studying?
And playing the piano, eh? Good! But not too
much piano, else you won’t want to do your task, and then
you won’t go up at Easter.” Not a muscle betrayed the
anxious suspense with which he waited to see how Hanno
took his greeting and what his reply would be. Nothing revealed
his painful inward shrinking when the child merely
gave him a shy glance of the gold-brown, shadowy eyes—a
glance that did not even reach his father’s face—and bent
again over his plate.</p>

<p>It was monstrous for him to brood over this childish
clumsiness. It was his fatherly duty to occupy himself a
little with the child: so, while the plates were changed, he
would examine him and try to stimulate his sense for facts.
How many inhabitants were there in the town? What streets
led from the Trave to the upper town? What were the names
of the granaries that belonged to the firm? Out with it, now;
speak up! But Hanno was silent. Not with any idea of
wounding or annoying his father! But these inhabitants,
these streets and granaries, which were normally a matter of
complete indifference to him, became positively hateful when
they were made the subject of an examination. However
lively he was beforehand, however gaily he had laughed and
talked with his father, his mood would go down to zero at the
first symptom of an examination, and his resistance would
collapse entirely. His eyes would cloud over, his mouth take
on a despondent droop, and he would be possessed by a
feeling of profound regret at the thoughtlessness of Papa,
who surely knew that such tests came to nothing and only
spoiled the whole meal time for everybody! With eyes
swimming in tears he looked down at his plate. Ida would
nudge him and whisper to him: the streets, the granaries.
Oh, that was all useless, perfectly useless. She did not understand.
He did know the names—at least some of them. It
would have been easy to do what Papa asked—if only he
were not possessed and prevented by an overpowering sadness!
A severe word from his father and a tap with the
fork against the knife rest brought him to himself with a
start. He cast a glance at his mother and Ida and tried to
speak. But the first syllables were already drowned in sobs.
“That’s enough,” shouted the Senator, angrily. “Keep still—you
needn’t tell me! You can sit there dumb and silly all
the rest of your life!” And the meal would be finished in
uncomfortable silence.</p>

<p>When the Senator felt troubled about Hanno’s passionate
preoccupation with his music, it was this dreaminess, this
weeping, this total lack of freshness and energy, that he fixed
upon.</p>

<p>All his life the boy had been delicate. His teeth had
been particularly bad, and had been the cause of many painful
illnesses and difficulties. It had nearly cost him his life to
cut his first set; the gums showed a constant tendency
to inflammation, and there were abscesses, which Mamsell
Jungmann used to open with a needle at the proper time.
Now his second teeth were beginning to come in, and the suffering
was even greater. He had almost more pain than he
could bear, and he spent many sleepless, feverish nights. His
teeth, when they came, were as white and beautiful as his
mother’s; but they were soft and brittle, and crowded each
other out of shape when they came in; so that little Hanno
was obliged, for the correction of all these evils, to make the
acquaintance early in life of a very dreadful man—no less
than Herr Brecht, the dentist, in Mill Street.</p>

<p>Even this man’s name was significant: it suggested the
frightful sensation in Hanno’s jaw when the roots of a tooth
were pulled, lifted, and wrenched out; the sound of it made
Hanno’s heart contract, just as it did when he cowered in an
easy-chair in Herr Brecht’s waiting-room, with the faithful
Jungmann sitting opposite, and looked at the pictures in a
magazine, while he breathed in the sharp-smelling air of the
room and waited for the dentist to open the door of the
operating-room, with his polite and horrible “Won’t you come
in, please?”</p>

<p>This operating-room possessed one strange attraction, a
gorgeous parrot with venomous little eyes, which sat in a
brass cage in the corner and was called, for unknown reasons,
Josephus. He used to say “Sit down; one moment, please,”
in a voice like an old fish-wife’s; and though the hideous circumstances
made this sound like mockery, yet Hanno felt for
the bird a curious mixture of fear and affection. Imagine—a
parrot, a big, bright-coloured bird, that could talk and
was called Josephus! He was like something out of an enchanted
forest; like Grimm’s fairy tales, which Ida read aloud
to him. And when Herr Brecht opened the door, his invitation
was repeated by Josephus in such a way that somehow
Hanno was laughing when he went into the operating-room
and sat down in the queer big chair by the window, next the
treadle machine.</p>

<p>Herr Brecht looked a good deal like Josephus. His nose
was of the same shape, above his grizzled moustaches. The
bad thing about him was that he was nervous, and dreaded
the tortures he was obliged to inflict. “We must proceed to
extraction, Fräulein,” he would say, growing pale. Hanno
himself was in a pale cold sweat, with staring eyes, incapable
of protesting or running away; in short, in much the same
condition as a condemned criminal. He saw Herr Brecht,
with the forceps in his sleeve, bend over him, and noticed
that little beads were standing out on his bald brow, and that
his mouth was twisted. When it was all over, and Hanno,
pale and trembling, spat blood into the blue basin at his side,
Herr Brecht too had to sit down, and wipe his forehead and
take a drink of water.</p>

<p>They assured little Johann that this man would do him
good and save him suffering in the end. But when Hanno
weighed his present pains against the positive good that had
accrued from them, he felt that the former far outweighed the
latter; and he regarded these visits to Mill Street as so much
unnecessary torture. They removed four beautiful white
molars which had just come in, to make room for the wisdom
teeth expected later: this required four weeks of visits, in
order not to subject the boy to too great a strain. It was a
fearful time!—a long drawn-out martyrdom, in which dread
of the next visit began before the last one, with its attendant
exhaustion, was fairly over. When the last tooth was drawn,
Hanno was quite worn out, and was ill in bed for a week.</p>

<p>This trouble with his teeth affected not only his spirits but
also the functioning of all his other organs. What he could
not chew he did not digest, and there came attacks of gastric
fever, accompanied by fitful heart action, according as the
heart was either weakened or too strongly stimulated. And
there were spells of giddiness, while the <i>pavor nocturnus</i>,
that strange affliction beloved of Dr. Grabow, continued unabated.
Hardly a night passed that little Johann did not
start up in bed, wringing his hands with every mark of unbearable
anguish, and crying out piteously for help, as though
some one were trying to choke him or some other awful
thing were happening. In the morning he had forgotten it
all. Dr. Grabow’s treatment consisted of giving fruit-juice
before the child went to bed; which had absolutely no effect.</p>

<p>The physical arrests and the pains which Hanno suffered
made him old for his age; he was what is called precocious;
and though this was not very obvious, being restrained in him,
as it were, by his own unconscious good taste, still it expressed
itself at times in the form of a melancholy
superiority. “How are you, Hanno?” somebody would ask:
his grandmother or one of the Broad Street Buddenbrooks.
A little resigned curl of the lip, or a shrug of the shoulders
in their blue sailor suit, would be the only answer.</p>

<p>“Do you like to go to school?”</p>

<p>“No,” answered Hanno, with quiet candour—he did not
consider it worth while to try to tell a lie in such cases.</p>

<p>“No? But one has to learn writing, reading, arithmetic—”</p>

<p>“And so on,” said little Johann.</p>

<p>No, he did not like going to school—the old monastic
school with its cloisters and vaulted classrooms. He was
hampered by his illnesses, and often absent-minded, for his
thoughts would linger among his harmonic combinations,
or upon the still unravelled marvel of some piece which he
had heard his mother and Herr Pfühl playing; and all this
did not help him on in the sciences. These lower classes
were taught by assistant masters and seminarists, for whom
he entertained mingled feelings: a dread of possible future
punishments and a secret contempt for their social inferiority,
their spiritual limitations, and their physical unkemptness.
Herr Tietge, a little grey man in a greasy black
coat, who had taught in the school even in the time of the
deceased Marcellus Stengel; who squinted abominably and
sought to remedy this defect by wearing glasses as thick and
round as a ship’s port-holes—Herr Tietge told little Johann
how quick and industrious his father had been at figures.
Herr Tietge had severe fits of coughing, and spat all over
the floor of his platform.</p>

<p>Hanno had, among his schoolmates, no intimates save one.
But this single bond was very close, even from his earliest
school days. His friend was a child of aristocratic birth but
neglected appearance, a certain Count Mölln, whose first name
was Kai.</p>

<p>Kai was a lad of about Hanno’s height, dressed not in a
sailor suit, but in shabby clothes of uncertain colour, with
here and there a button missing, and a great patch in the
seat. His arms were too long for the sleeves of his coat, and
his hands seemed impregnated with dust and earth to a
permanent grey colour; but they were unusually narrow and
elegant, with long fingers and tapering nails. His head was
to match: neglected, uncombed, and none too clean, but endowed
by nature with all the marks of pure and noble birth.
The carelessly parted hair, reddish-blond in colour, waved
back from a white brow, and a pair of light-blue eyes
gleamed bright and keen from beneath. The cheek-bones
were slightly prominent: while the nose, with its delicate
nostrils and slightly aquiline curve, and the mouth, with its
short upper lip, were already quite unmistakable and
characteristic.</p>

<p>Hanno Buddenbrook had seen the little count once or twice,
even before they met at school, when he took his walks with
Ida northward from the Castle Gate. Some distance outside
the town, nearly as far as the first outlying village, lay a
small farm, a tiny, almost valueless property without even
a name. The passer-by got the impression of a dunghill, a
quantity of chickens, a dog-hut, and a wretched, kennel-like
building with a sloping red roof. This was the manor-house,
and therein dwelt Kai’s father, Count Eberhard Mölln.</p>

<p>He was an eccentric, hardly ever seen by anybody, busy
on his dunghill with his dogs, his chickens, and his vegetable-patch:
a large man in top-boots, with a green frieze
jacket. He had a bald head and a huge grey beard like the
tail of a turnip; he carried a riding-whip in his hand, though
he had no horse to his name, and wore a monocle stuck into
his eye under the bushy eyebrow. Except him and his son,
there was no Count Mölln in all the length and breadth of the
land any more: the various branches of a once rich, proud,
and powerful family had gradually withered off, until now
there was only an aunt, with whom Kai’s father was not on
terms. She wrote romances for the family story-papers, under
a dashing pseudonym. The story was told of Count Eberhard
that when he first withdrew to his little farm, he devised
a means of protecting himself from the importunities of peddlers,
beggars, and busy-bodies. He put up a sign which
read: “Here lives Count Mölln. He wants nothing, buys
nothing, and gives nothing away.” When the sign had
served its purpose, he removed it.</p>

<p>Motherless—for the Countess had died when her child was
born, and the housework was done by an elderly female—little
Kai grew up like a wild animal, among the dogs and
chickens; and here Hanno Buddenbrook had looked at him
shyly from a distance, as he leaped like a rabbit among the
cabbages, romped with the dogs, and frightened the fowls by
turning somersaults.</p>

<p>They met again in the schoolroom, where Hanno probably
felt again his first alarm at the little Count’s unkempt exterior.
But not for long. A sure instinct had led him to pay no heed
to the outward negligence; had shown him instead the white
brow, the delicate mouth, the finely shaped blue eyes, which
looked with a sort of resentful hostility into his own; and
Hanno felt sympathy for this one alone among all his fellows.
But he would never, by himself, have taken the first steps; he
was too timid for that. Without the ruthless impetuosity of
little Kai they might have remained strangers, after all. The
passionate rapidity of his approach even frightened Hanno, at
first. The neglected little count sued for the favour of the
quiet, elegantly dressed Hanno with a fiery, aggressive masculinity
impossible to resist. Kai could not, it is true, help
Hanno with his lessons. His untamed spirits were as hostile
to the “tables” as was little Buddenbrook’s dreamy abstractedness.
But he gave him everything he had: glass bullets,
wooden tops, even a broken lead pistol which was his dearest
treasure. During the recess he told him about his home and
the puppies and chickens, and walked with him at midday as
far as he dared, though Ida Jungmann, with a packet of sandwiches,
was always waiting for her fledgling at the school gate.
It was from Ida that Kai heard little Buddenbrook’s nickname;
he took it up, and never called him henceforth by
anything else.</p>

<p>One day he demanded that Hanno, instead of going to the
Mill-wall, should take a walk with him to his father’s house
to see the baby guinea-pigs. Fräulein Jungmann finally
yielded to the teasing of the two children. They strolled out
to the noble domain, viewed the dunghill, the vegetables, the
fowls, dogs, and guinea-pigs, and even went into the house,
where in a long low room on the ground floor, Count Eberhard
sat in defiant isolation, reading at a clumsy table. He
asked crossly what they wanted.</p>

<p>Ida Jungmann could not be brought to repeat the visit. She
insisted that, if the two children wished to be together, Kai
could visit Hanno instead. So for the first time, with honest
admiration, but no trace of shyness, Kai entered Hanno’s
beautiful home. After that he went often. Soon nothing but
the deep winter snows prevented him from making the long
way back again for the sake of a few hours with his friend.</p>

<p>They sat in the large play-room in the second storey and
did their lessons together. There were long sums that covered
both sides of the slate with additions, subtractions, multiplications,
and divisions, and had to come out to zero in the end;
otherwise there was a mistake, and they must hunt and hunt
till they had found the little beast and exterminated him.
Then they had to study grammar, and learn the rules of comparison,
and write down very neat, tidy examples underneath.
Thus: “Horn is transparent, glass is more transparent,
light is most transparent.” They took their exercise-books
and conned sentences like the following: “I received a letter,
saying that he felt aggrieved because he believed that you had
deceived him.” The fell intent of this sentence, so full of
pitfalls, was that you should write <i>ei</i> where you ought to write
<i>ie</i>, and contrariwise. They had, in fact, done that very thing,
and now it must be corrected. But when all was finished they
might put their books aside and sit on the window-ledge while
Ida read to them.</p>

<p>The good soul read about Cinderella, about the prince who
could not shiver and shake, about Rumpelstiltskin, about Rapunzel
and the Frog Prince—in her deep, patient voice, her
eyes half-shut, for she knew the stories by heart, she had read
them so often. She wet her finger and turned the page automatically.</p>

<p>But after a while Kai, who possessed the constant craving to
do something himself, to have some effect on his surroundings,
would close the book and begin to tell stories himself. It was
a good idea, for they knew all the printed ones, and Ida
needed a rest sometimes, too. Kai’s stories were short and
simple at first, but they expanded and grew bolder and more
complicated with time. The interesting thing about them was
that they never stood quite in the air, but were based upon a
reality which he presented in a new and mysterious light.
Hanno particularly liked the one about the wicked enchanter
who tortured all human beings by his malignant art; who
had captured a beautiful prince named Josephus and turned
him into a green-and-red parrot, which he kept in a gilded
cage. But in a far distant land the chosen hero was growing
up, who should one day fearlessly advance at the head of an
invincible army of dogs, chickens, and guinea-pigs and slay
the base enchanter with a single sword-thrust, and deliver
all the world—in particular, Hanno Buddenbrook—from his
clutches. Then Josephus would be restored to his proper
form and return to his kingdom, in which Kai and Hanno
would be appointed to high offices.</p>

<p>Senator Buddenbrook saw the two friends together now
and then, as he passed the door of the play-room. He had
nothing against the intimacy, for it was clear that the two
lads did each other good. Hanno gentled, tamed, and ennobled
Kai, who loved him tenderly, admired his white hands,
and, for his sake, let Ida Jungmann wash his own with soap
and a nail-brush. And if Hanno could absorb some of his
friend’s wild energy and spirits, it would be welcome, for the
Senator realized keenly the constant feminine influence that
surrounded the boy, and knew that it was not the best means
for developing his manly qualities.</p>

<p>The faithful devotion of the good Ida could not be repaid
with gold. She had been in the family now for more than
thirty years. She had cared for the previous generations
with self-abnegation; but Hanno she carried in her arms,
lapped him in tender care, and loved him to idolatry.
She had a naïve, unshakable belief in his privileged station
in life, which sometimes went to the length of absurdity. In
whatever touched him she showed a surprising, even an
unpleasant effrontery. Suppose, for instance, she took him
with her to buy cakes at the pastry-shop: she would poke
among the sweets on the counter and select a piece for Hanno,
which she would coolly hand him without paying for it—the
man should feel himself honoured, indeed! And before a
crowded show-window she would ask the people in front, in
her west-Prussian dialect, pleasantly enough, but with decision,
to make a place for her charge. He was so uncommon
in her eyes that she felt there was hardly another child in the
world worthy to touch him. In little Kai’s case, the mutual
preference of the two children had been too strong for her.
Possibly she was a little taken by his name, too. But if other
children came up to them on the Mill-wall, as she sat with
Hanno on a bench, Fräulein Jungmann would get up almost
at once, make some excuse or other—it was late, or there was
a draught—and take her charge away. The pretexts she gave
to little Johann would have led him to believe that all his contemporaries
were either scrofulous of full of “evil humours,”
and that he himself was a solitary exception; which did not
tend to increase his already deficient confidence and ease of
manner.</p>

<p>Senator Buddenbrook did not know all the details; but he
saw enough to convince him that his son’s development was
not taking the desired course. If he could only take his upbringing
in his own hands, and mould his spirit by daily and
hourly contact! But he had not the time. He perceived
the lamentable failure of his occasional efforts: he knew they
only strained the relations between father and son. In his
mind was a picture which he longed to reproduce: it was a
picture of Hanno’s great-grandfather, whom he himself had
known as a boy: a clear-sighted man, jovial, simple, sturdy,
humorous—why could not little Johann grow up like that?
If only he could suppress or forbid the music, which was
surely not good for the lad’s physical development, absorbed
his powers, and took his mind from the practical affairs of
life! That dreamy nature—did it not almost, at times, border
on irresponsibility?</p>

<p>One day, some three quarters of an hour before dinner,
Hanno had gone down alone to the first storey. He had
practised for a long time on the piano, and now was idling
about in the living-room. He half lay, half sat, on the chaise-longue,
tying and untying his sailor’s knot, and his eyes,
roving aimlessly about, caught sight of an open portfolio
on his mother’s nut-wood writing-table. It was the leather
case with the family papers. He rested his elbow on the
sofa-cushion, and his chin in his hand, and looked at the things
for a while from a distance. Papa must have had them out
after second breakfast, and left them there because he was
not finished with them. Some of the papers were sticking in
the portfolio, some loose sheets lying outside were weighted
with a metal ruler, and the large gilt-edged notebook with the
motley paper lay there open.</p>

<p>Hanno slipped idly down from the sofa and went to the
writing-table. The book was open at the Buddenbrook family
tree, set forth in the hand of his various forbears, including
his father; complete, with rubrics, parentheses, and plainly
marked dates. Kneeling with one knee on the desk-chair,
leaning his head with its soft waves of brown hair on the palm
of his hand, Hanno looked at the manuscript sidewise, carelessly
critical, a little contemptuous, and supremely indifferent,
letting his free hand toy with Mamma’s gold-and-ebony pen.
His eyes roved all over these names, masculine and feminine,
some of them in queer old-fashioned writing with great flourishes,
written in faded yellow or thick black ink, to which
little grains of sand were sticking. At the very bottom, in
Papa’s small, neat handwriting that ran so fast over the page,
he read his own name, under that of his parents: Justus,
Johann, Kaspar, born April 15, 1861. He liked looking at it.
He straightened up a little, and took the ruler and pen, still
rather idly; let his eye travel once more over the whole genealogical
host; then, with absent care, mechanically and
dreamily, he made with the gold pen a beautiful, clean double
line diagonally across the entire page, the upper one heavier
than the lower, just as he had been taught to embellish the
page of his arithmetic book. He looked at his work with his
head on one side, and then moved away.</p>

<p>After dinner the Senator called him up and surveyed him
with his eyebrows drawn together.</p>

<p>“What is this? Where did it come from? Did you do
it?”</p>

<p>Hanno had to think a minute, whether he really had done it;
and then he answered “Yes.”</p>

<p>“What for? What is the matter with you? Answer me!
What possessed you, to do such a mischievous thing?” cried
the Senator, and struck Hanno’s cheek lightly with the rolled-up
notebook.</p>

<p>And little Johann stammered, retreating, with his hand to
his cheek, “I thought—I thought—there was nothing else
coming.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Nowadays</span>, when the family gathered at table on Thursdays,
under the calmly smiling gaze of the immortals on the walls,
they had a new and serious theme. It called out on the faces
of the female Buddenbrooks, at least the Broad Street ones, an
expression of cold restraint. But it highly excited Frau
Permaneder, as her manner and gestures betrayed. She tossed
back her head, stretched out her arms before her, or flung them
above her head as she talked; and her voice showed by turns
anger and dismay, passionate opposition and deep feeling.
She would pass over from the particular to the general, and
talk in her throaty voice about wicked people, interrupting herself
with the little cough that was due to poor digestion. Or
she would utter little trumpetings of disgust: Teary Trietschke,
Grünlich, Permaneder! A new name had now been added to
these, and she pronounced it in a tone of indescribable scorn
and hatred: “The District Attorney!”</p>

<p>But when Director Hugo Weinschenk entered—late, as usual,
for he was overwhelmed with work; balancing his two fists
and weaving about more than ever at the waist of his frock-coat—and
sat down at table, his lower lip hanging down with
its impudent expression under his moustaches, then the conversation
would come to a full stop, and heavy silence would
brood over the table until the Senator came to the rescue by
asking the Director how his affair was going on—as if it were
an ordinary business dealing.</p>

<p>Hugo Weinschenk would answer that things were going very
well, very well indeed, they could not go otherwise; and then
he would blithely change the subject. He was much more
sprightly than he used to be; there was a certain lack of restraint
in his roving eye, and he would ask ever so many times
about Gerda Buddenbrook’s fiddle without getting any reply.
He talked freely and gaily—only it was a pity his flow of spirits
prevented him from guarding his tongue; for he now and then
told anecdotes which were not at all suited to the company.
One, in particular, was about a wet-nurse who prejudiced the
health of her charge by the fact that she suffered from
flatulence. Too late, or not at all, he remarked that his
wife was flushing rosy red, that Thomas, the Frau Consul and
Gerda were sitting like statues, and the Misses Buddenbrook
exchanging glances that were fairly boring holes in each other.
Even Riekchen Severin was looking insulted at the bottom
of the table, and old Consul Kröger was the single one of the
company who gave even a subdued snort.</p>

<p>What was the trouble with Director Weinschenk? This
industrious, solid citizen with the rough exterior and no social
graces, who devoted himself with an obstinate sense of duty to
his work alone—this man was supposed to have been guilty,
not once but repeatedly, of a serious fault: he was accused of,
he had been indicted for, performing a business manœuvre
which was not only questionable, but directly dishonest and
criminal. There would be a trial, the outcome of which was
not easy to guess. What was he accused of? It was this:
certain fires of considerable extent had taken place in different
localities, which would have cost his company large sums of
money. Director Weinschenk was accused of having received
private information of such accidents through his agents, and
then, in wrongful possession of this information, of having
transferred the back insurance to another firm, thus saving
his own the loss. The matter was now in the hands of the
State Attorney, Dr. Moritz Hagenström.</p>

<p>“Thomas,” said the Frau Consul in private to her son,
“please explain it to me. I do not understand. What do you
make of the affair?”</p>

<p>“Why, my dear Mother,” he answered, “what is there to
say? It does not look as though things were quite as they
should be—unfortunately. It seems unlikely to me that Weinschenk
is as guilty as people think. In the modern style of
doing business, there is a thing they call usance. And usance—well,
imagine a sort of manœuvre, not exactly open and
above-board, something that looks dishonest to the man in
the street, yet perhaps quite customary and taken for granted
in the business world: that is usance. The boundary line
between usance and actual dishonesty is extremely hard to
draw. Well—if Weinschenk has done anything he shouldn’t,
he has probably done no more than a good many of his colleagues
who will not get caught. But—I don’t see much
chance of his being cleared. Perhaps in a larger city he
might be, but here everything depends on cliques and personal
motives. He should have borne that in mind in selecting his
lawyer. It is true that we have no really eminent lawyer in
the whole town, nobody with superior oratorical talent, who
knows all the ropes and is versed in dubious transactions.
All our jurists hang together; they have family connections,
in many cases; they eat together; they work together, and
they are accustomed to considering each other. In my
opinion, it would have been clever to take a town lawyer. But
what did Weinschenk do? He thought it necessary—and
this in itself makes his innocence look doubtful—to get a
lawyer from Berlin, a Dr. Breslauer, who is a regular rake,
an accomplished orator and up to all the tricks of the trade.
He has the reputation of having got so-and-so many dishonest
bankrupts off scot-free. He will conduct this affair with the
same cleverness—for a consideration. But will it do any
good? I can see already that our town lawyers will band
together to fight him tooth and nail, and that Dr. Hagenström’s
hearers will already be prepossessed in his favour. As for
the witnesses: well, Weinschenk’s own staff won’t be any too
friendly to him, I’m afraid. What we indulgently call his
rough exterior—he would call it that, himself, too—has not
made him many friends. In short, Mother, I am looking
forward to trouble. It will be a pity for Erica, if it turns
out badly; but I feel most for Tony. You see, she is
quite right in saying that Hagenström is glad of the chance.
The thing concerns all of us, and the disgrace will fall on us
too; for Weinschenk belongs to the family and eats at our
table. As far as I am concerned, I can manage. I know
what I have to do: in public, I shall act as if I had nothing
whatever to do with the affair. I will not go to the trial—although
I am sorry not to, for Breslauer is sure to be
interesting. And in general I must behave with complete
indifference, to protect myself from the imputation of wanting
to use my influence. But Tony? I don’t like to think
what a sad business a conviction will be for her. She
protests vehemently against envious intrigues and calumniators
and all that; but what really moves her is her anxiety
lest, after all her other troubles, she may see her daughter’s
honourable position lost as well. It is the last blow. She
will protest her belief in Weinschenk’s innocence the more
loudly the more she is forced to doubt it. Well, he may be
innocent, after all. We can only wait and see, Mother, and
be very tactful with him and Tony and Erica. But I’m
afraid—”</p>

<p>It was under these circumstances that the Christmas
feast drew near, to which little Hanno was counting the
days, with a beating heart and the help of a calendar manufactured
by Ida Jungmann, with a Christmas tree on the
last leaf.</p>

<p>The signs of festivity increased. Ever since the first
Sunday in Advent a great gaily coloured picture of a certain
Ruprecht had been hanging on the wall in grandmama’s
dining-room. And one morning Hanno found his covers and
the rug beside his bed sprinkled with gold tinsel. A few days
later, as Papa was lying with his newspaper on the living-room
sofa, and Hanno was reading “The Witch of Endor”
out of Gerock’s “Palm Leaves,” an “old man” was announced.
This had happened every year since Hanno was a baby—and
yet was always a surprise. They asked him in, this “old
man,” and he came shuffling along in a big coat with the fur
side out, sprinkled with bits of cotton-wool and tinsel. He
wore a fur cap, and his face had black smudges on it, and
his beard was long and white. The beard and the big, bushy
eyebrows were also sprinkled with tinsel. He explained—as
he did every year—in a harsh voice, that <i>this</i> sack (on his
left shoulder) was for good children, who said their prayers
(it contained apples and gilded nuts); but that <i>this</i> sack (on
his right shoulder) was for naughty children. The “old
man” was, of course, Ruprecht; perhaps not actually the
real Ruprecht—it might even be Wenzel the barber, dressed
up in Papa’s coat turned fur side out—but it was as much
Ruprecht as possible. Hanno, greatly impressed, said Our
Father for him, as he had last year—both times interrupting
himself now and again with a little nervous sob—and was permitted
to put his hand into the sack for good children, which
the “old man” forgot to take away.</p>

<p>The holidays came, and there was not much trouble over the
report, which had to be presented for Papa to read, even
at Christmas-time. The great dining-room was closed and
mysterious, and there were marzipan and gingerbread to eat—and
in the streets, Christmas had already come. Snow
fell, the weather was frosty, and on the sharp clear air were
borne the notes of the barrel-organ, for the Italians, with
their velvet jackets and their black moustaches, had arrived
for the Christmas feast. The shop-windows were gay with
toys and goodies; the booths for the Christmas fair had
been erected in the market-place; and wherever you went you
breathed in the fresh, spicy odour of the Christmas trees set
out for sale.</p>

<p>The evening of the twenty-third came at last, and with it
the present-giving in the house in Fishers’ Lane. This was
attended by the family only—it was a sort of dress rehearsal
for the Christmas Eve party given by the Frau Consul in Meng
Street. She clung to the old customs, and reserved the
twenty-fourth for a celebration to which the whole family
group was bidden; which, accordingly, in the late afternoon,
assembled in the landscape-room.</p>

<p>The old lady, flushed of cheek, and with feverish eyes,
arrayed in a heavy black-and-grey striped silk that gave out
a faint scent of patchouli, received her guests as they entered,
and embraced them silently, her gold bracelets tinkling.
She was strangely excited this evening— “Why, Mother,
you’re fairly trembling,” the Senator said when he came in
with Gerda and Hanno. “Everything will go off very easily.”
But she only whispered, kissing all three of them, “For
Jesus Christ’s sake—and my blessed Jean’s.”</p>

<p>Indeed, the whole consecrated programme instituted by
the deceased Consul had to be carried out to the smallest
detail; and the poor lady fluttered about, driven by her sense
of responsibility for the fitting accomplishment of the
evening’s performance, which must be pervaded with a deep
and fervent joy. She went restlessly back and forth, from
the pillared hall where the choir-boys from St. Mary’s were
already assembled, to the dining-room, where Riekchen
Severin was putting the finishing touches to the tree and the
table-full of presents, to the corridor full of shrinking old
people—the “poor” who were to share in the presents—and
back into the landscape-room, where she rebuked every unnecessary
word or sound with one of her mild sidelong
glances. It was so still that the sound of a distant hand-organ,
faint and clear like a toy music-box, came across to
them through the snowy streets. Some twenty persons or
more were sitting or standing about in the room; yet it was
stiller than a church—so still that, as the Senator cautiously
whispered to Uncle Justus, it reminded one more of a
funeral!</p>

<p>There was really no danger that the solemnity of the feast
would be rudely broken in upon by youthful high spirits.
A glance showed that almost all the persons in the room
were arrived at an age when the forms of expression are
already long ago fixed. Senator Thomas Buddenbrook, whose
pallor gave the lie to his alert, energetic, humorous expression;
Gerda, his wife, leaning back in her chair, the gleaming,
blue-ringed eyes in her pale face gazing fixedly at the crystal
prisms in the chandelier; his sister, Frau Permaneder; his
cousin, Jürgen Kröger, a quiet, neatly-dressed official;
Friederike, Henriette, and Pfiffi, the first two more long and
lean, the third smaller and plumper than ever, but all three
wearing their stereotyped expression, their sharp, spiteful
smile at everything and everybody, as though they were perpetually
saying “Really—it seems incredible!” Lastly, there
was poor, ashen-grey Clothilde, whose thoughts were probably
fixed upon the coming meal.—Every one of these persons was
past forty. The hostess herself, her brother Justus and his
wife, and little Therese Weichbrodt were all well past sixty;
while old Frau Consul Buddenbrook, Uncle Gotthold’s widow,
born Stüwing, as well as Madame Kethelsen, now, alas almost
entirely deaf, were already in the seventies.</p>

<p>Erica Weinschenk was the only person present in the bloom
of youth; she was much younger than her husband, whose
cropped, greying head stood out against the idyllic landscape
behind him. When her eyes—the light-blue eyes of Herr
Grünlich—rested upon him, you could see how her full bosom
rose and fell without a sound, and how she was beset with
anxious, bewildered thoughts about usance and book-keeping,
witnesses, prosecuting attorneys, defence, and judges.
Thoughts like these, un-Christmaslike though they were,
troubled everybody in the room. They all felt uncanny at the
presence in their midst of a member of the family who
was actually accused of an offence against the law, the civic
weal, and business probity, and who would probably be
visited by shame and imprisonment. Here was a Christmas
family party at the Buddenbrooks’—with an accused man in
the circle! Frau Permaneder’s dignity became majestic, and
the smile of the Misses Buddenbrook more and more
pointed.</p>

<p>And what of the children, the scant posterity upon whom
rested the family hopes? Were they conscious too of the
slightly uncanny atmosphere? The state of mind of the little
Elisabeth could not be fathomed. She sat on her bonne’s
lap in a frock trimmed by Frau Permaneder with satin bows,
folded her small hands into fists, sucked her tongue, and
stared straight ahead of her. Now and then she would utter
a brief sound, like a grunt, and the nurse would rock her a
little on her arm. But Hanno sat still on his footstool at his
mother’s knee and stared up, like her, into the chandelier.</p>

<p>Christian was missing—where was he? At the last minute
they noticed his absence. The Frau Consul’s characteristic
gesture, from the corner of her mouth up to her temple, as
though putting back a refractory hair, became frequent and
feverish. She gave an order to Mamsell Severin, and the
spinster went out through the hall, past the choir-boys and
the “poor” and down the corridor to Christian’s room,
where she knocked on the door.</p>

<p>Christian appeared straightway; he limped casually into
the landscape-room, rubbing his bald brow. “Good gracious,
children,” he said, “I nearly forgot the party!”</p>

<p>“You nearly forgot—” his mother repeated, and stiffened.</p>

<p>“Yes, I really forgot it was Christmas. I was reading a
book of travel, about South America.—Dear me, I’ve seen
such a lot of Christmases!” he added, and was about to
launch out upon a description of a Christmas in a fifth-rate
variety theatre in London—when all at once the church-like
hush of the room began to work upon him, and he moved on
tip-toe to his place, wrinkling up his nose.</p>

<p>“Rejoice, O Daughter of Zion!” sang the choir-boys. They
had previously been indulging in such audible practical
jokes that the Senator had to get up and stand in the doorway
to inspire respect. But now they sang beautifully.
The clear treble, sustained by the deeper voices, soared up in
pure, exultant, glorifying tones, bearing all hearts along with
them: softening the smiles of the spinsters, making the old
folk look in upon themselves and back upon the past; easing
the hearts of those still in the midst of life’s tribulations, and
helping them to forget for a little while.</p>

<p>Hanno unclasped his hands from about his knees. He
looked very pale, and cold, played with the fringe of his
stool, and twisted his tongue about among his teeth. He had
to draw a deep breath every little while, for his heart contracted
with a joy almost painful at the exquisite bell-like purity
of the chorale. The white folding doors were still tightly
closed, but the spicy poignant odour drifted through the
cracks and whetted one’s appetite for the wonder within.
Each year with throbbing pulses he awaited this vision of ineffable,
unearthly splendour. What would there be for him,
in there? What he had wished for, of course; there was always
that—unless he had been persuaded out of it beforehand.
The theatre, then, the long-desired toy theatre, would spring
at him as the door opened, and show him the way to his place.
This was the suggestion which had stood heavily underlined at
the top of his list, ever since he had seen <i>Fidelio</i>; indeed,
since then, it had been almost his single thought.</p>

<p>He had been taken to the opera as compensation for a
particularly painful visit to Herr Brecht; sitting beside his
mother, in the dress circle, he had followed breathless a performance
of <i>Fidelio</i>, and since that time he had heard
nothing, seen nothing, thought of nothing but opera, and a
passion for the theatre filled him and almost kept him sleepless.
He looked enviously at people like Uncle Christian,
who was known as a regular frequenter and might go every
night if he liked: Consul Döhlmann, Gosch the broker—how
could they endure the joy of seeing it every night? He
himself would ask no more than to look once a week into the
hall, before the performance: hear the voices of the instruments
being tuned, and gaze for a while at the curtain! For
he loved it all, the seats, the musicians, the drop-curtain—even
the smell of gas.</p>

<p>Would his theatre be large? What sort of curtain would
it have? A tiny hole must be cut in it at once—there was a
peep-hole in the curtain at the theatre. Had Grandmamma, or
rather had Mamsell Severin—for Grandmamma could not see
to everything herself—been able to find all the necessary
scenery for <i>Fidelio</i>? He determined to shut himself up to-morrow
and give a performance all by himself, and already
in fancy he heard his little figures singing: for he was
approaching the theatre by way of his music.</p>

<p>“Exult, Jerusalem!” finished the choir; and their voices,
following one another in fugue form, united joyously in the
last syllable. The clear accord died away; deep silence
reigned in the pillared hall and the landscape-room. The
elders looked down, oppressed by the pause; only Director
Weinschenk’s eyes roved boldly about, and Frau Permaneder
coughed her dry cough, which she could not suppress. Now
the Frau Consul moved slowly to the table and sat among
her family. She turned up the lamp and took in her hands
the great Bible with its edges of faded gold-leaf. She stuck
her glasses on her nose, unfastened the two great leather hasps
of the book, opened it to the place where there was a bookmark,
took a sip of <i>eau sucrée</i>, and began to read, from the
yellowed page with the large print, the Christmas chapter.</p>

<p>She read the old familiar words with a simple, heart-felt
accent that sounded clear and moving in the pious hush.
“‘And to men good will,’” she finished, and from the
pillared hall came a trio of voices: “Holy night, peaceful
night!” The family in the landscape-room joined in. They
did so cautiously, for most of them were unmusical, as a tone
now and then betrayed. But that in no wise impaired the
effect of the old hymn. Frau Permaneder sang with
trembling lips; it sounded sweetest and most touching to the
heart of her who had a troubled life behind her, and looked
back upon it in the brief peace of this holy hour. Madame
Kethelsen wept softly, but comprehended nothing.</p>

<p>Now the Frau Consul rose. She grasped the hands of her
grandson Johann and her granddaughter Elisabeth, and proceeded
through the room. The elders of the family fell in
behind, and the younger brought up the rear; the servants
and poor joined in from the hall; and so they marched, singing
with one accord “Oh, Evergreen”—Uncle Christian sang
“Oh, Everblue,” and made the children laugh by lifting up his
legs like a jumping-jack—through the wide-open, lofty folding
doors, and straight into Paradise.</p>

<p>The whole great room was filled with the fragrance of
slightly singed evergreen twigs and glowing with light from
countless tiny flames. The sky-blue hangings with the white
figures on them added to the brilliance. There stood the
mighty tree, between the dark-red window-curtains, towering
nearly to the ceiling, decorated with silver tinsel and large
white lilies, with a shining angel at the top and the manger at
the foot. Its candles twinkled in the general flood of light
like far-off stars. And a row of tiny trees, also full of stars
and hung with comfits, stood on the long white table, laden
with presents, that stretched from the window to the door.
All the gas-brackets on the wall were lighted too, and thick
candles burned in all four of the gilded candelabra in the
corners of the room. Large objects, too large to stand upon
the table, were arranged upon the floor, and two smaller
tables, likewise adorned with tiny trees and covered with gifts
for the servants and the poor, stood on either side of the
door.</p>

<p>Dazzled by the light and the unfamiliar look of the room,
they marched once around it, singing, filed past the manger
where lay the little wax figure of the Christ-child, and then
moved to their places and stood silent.</p>

<p>Hanno was quite dazed. His fevered glance had soon
sought out the theatre, which, as it stood there upon the table,
seemed larger and grander than anything he had dared to
dream of. But his place had been changed—it was now
opposite to where he had stood last year, and this made him
doubtful whether the theatre was really his. And on the
floor beneath it was something else, a large, mysterious something,
which had surely not been on his list; a piece of furniture,
that looked like a commode—could it be meant for
him?</p>

<p>“Come here, my dear child,” said the Frau Consul, “and
look at this.” She lifted the lid. “I know you like to play
chorals. Herr Pfühl will show you how. You must tread
all the time, sometimes more and sometimes less; and then,
not lift up the hands, but change the fingers so, <i>peu à peu</i>.”</p>

<p>It was a harmonium—a pretty little thing of polished brown
wood, with metal handles at the sides, gay bellows worked
with a treadle, and a neat revolving stool. Hanno struck a
chord. A soft organ tone released itself and made the others
look up from their presents. He hugged his grandmother,
who pressed him tenderly to her, and then left him to receive
the thanks of her other guests.</p>

<p>He turned to his theatre. The harmonium was an overpowering
dream—which just now he had no time to indulge.
There was a superfluity of joy; and he lost sight of single
gifts in trying to see and notice everything at once. Ah,
here was the prompter’s box, a shell-shaped one, and a
beautiful red and gold curtain rolled up and down behind
it. The stage was set for the last act of <i>Fidelio</i>. The poor
prisoners stood with folded hands. Don Pizarro, in enormous
puffed sleeves, was striking a permanent and awesome
attitude, and the minister, in black velvet, approached from
behind with hasty strides, to turn all to happiness. It was
just as in the theatre, only almost more beautiful. The
Jubilee chorus, the finale, echoed in Hanno’s ears, and he
sat down at the harmonium to play a fragment which stuck
in his memory. But he got up again, almost at once, to take
up the book he had wished for, a mythology, in a red binding
with a gold Pallas Athene on the cover. He ate some of the
sweetmeats from his plate full of marzipan, gingerbread, and
other goodies, looked through various small articles like
writing utensils and school-bag—and for the moment forgot
everything else, to examine a penholder with a tiny glass bulb
on it: when you held this up to your eye, you saw, like magic,
a broad Swiss landscape.</p>

<p>Mamsell Severin and the maid passed tea and biscuits; and
while Hanno dipped and ate, he had time to look about.
Every one stood talking and laughing; they all showed each
other their presents and admired the presents of others.
Objects of porcelain, silver, gold, nickel, wood, silk, cloth,
and every other conceivable material lay on the table. Huge
loaves of decorated gingerbread, alternating with loaves of
marzipan, stood in long rows, still moist and fresh. All the
presents made by Frau Permaneder were decorated with huge
satin bows.</p>

<p>Now and then some one came up to little Johann, put an
arm across his shoulders, and looked at his presents with the
overdone, cynical admiration which people manufacture for
the treasures of children. Uncle Christian was the only
person who did not display this grown-up arrogance. He
sauntered over to his nephew’s place, with a diamond ring on
his finger, a present from his mother; and his pleasure in the
toy theatre was as unaffected as Hanno’s own.</p>

<p>“By George, that’s fine,” he said, letting the curtain up and
down, and stepping back for a view of the scenery. “Did
you ask for it? Oh, so you did ask for it!” he suddenly said
after a pause, during which his eyes had roved about the room
as though he were full of unquiet thoughts. “Why did you
ask for it? What made you think of it? Have you been in
the theatre? <i>Fidelio</i>, eh? Yes, they give that well. And
you want to imitate it, do you? Do opera yourself, eh? Did
it make such an impression on you? Listen, son—take my
advice: don’t think too much about such things—theatre, and
that sort of thing. It’s no good. Believe your old uncle.
I’ve always spent too much time on them, and that is why I
haven’t come to much good. I’ve made great mistakes, you
know.”</p>

<p>Thus he held forth to his nephew, while Hanno looked up
at him curiously. He paused, and his bony, emaciated face
cleared up as he regarded the little theatre. Then he suddenly
moved forward one of the figures on the stage, and sang, in
a cracked and hollow tremolo, “Ha, what terrible transgression!”
He sat down on the piano-stool, which he shoved up
in front of the theatre, and began to give a performance, singing
all the rôles and the accompaniment as well, and gesticulating
furiously. The family gathered at his back, laughed,
nodded their heads, and enjoyed it immensely. As for
Hanno, his pleasure was profound. Christian broke off, after
a while, very abruptly. His face clouded, he rubbed his hand
over his skull and down his left side, and turned to his
audience with his nose wrinkled and his face quite drawn.</p>

<p>“There it is again,” he said. “I never have a little fun without
having to pay for it. It is not an ordinary pain, you
know, it is a misery, down all this left side, because the nerves
are too short.”</p>

<p>But his relatives took his complaints as little seriously as
they had his entertainment. They hardly answered him, but
indifferently dispersed, leaving Christian sitting before the
little theatre in silence. He blinked rapidly for a bit and
then got up.</p>

<p>“No, child,” said he, stroking Hanno’s head: “amuse
yourself with it, but not too much, you know: don’t neglect
your work for it, do you hear? I have made a great many
mistakes.—I think I’ll go over to the club for a while,” he
said to the elders. “They are celebrating there to-day, too.
Good-bye for the present.” And he went off across the hall,
on his stiff, crooked legs.</p>

<p>They had all eaten the midday meal earlier than usual to-day,
and been hungry for the tea and biscuits. But they had
scarcely finished when great crystal bowls were handed round
full of a yellow, grainy substance which turned out to be almond
cream. It was a mixture of eggs, ground almonds, and
rose-water, tasting perfectly delicious; but if you ate even a
tiny spoonful too much, the result was an attack of indigestion.
However, the company was not restrained by fear of consequences—even
though Frau Consul begged them to “leave a
little corner for supper.” Clothilde, in particular, performed
miracles with the almond cream, and lapped it up like so much
porridge, with heart-felt gratitude. There was also wine jelly
in glasses, and English plum-cake. Gradually they all moved
over to the landscape-room, where they sat with their plates
round the table.</p>

<p>Hanno remained alone in the dining-room. Little Elisabeth
Weinschenk had already been taken home; but he was to
stop up for supper, for the first time in his life. The servants
and the poor folk had had their presents and gone; Ida Jungmann
was chattering with Riekchen Severin in the hall—although
generally, as a governess, she preserved a proper distance
between herself and the Frau Consul’s maid.—The lights
of the great tree were burnt down and extinguished, the manger
was in darkness. But a few candles still burned on the
small trees, and now and then a twig came within reach of the
flame and crackled up, increasing the pungent smell in the
room. Every breath of air that stirred the trees stirred the
pieces of tinsel too, and made them give out a delicate metallic
whisper. It was still enough to hear the hand-organ
again, sounding through the frosty air from a distant street.</p>

<p>Hanno abandoned himself to the enjoyment of the Christmas
sounds and smells. He propped his head on his hand
and read in his mythology book, munching mechanically the
while, because that was proper to the day: marzipan, sweetmeats,
almond cream, and plum-cake; until the chest-oppression
caused by an over-loaded stomach mingled with
the sweet excitation of the evening and gave him a feeling of
pensive felicity. He read about the struggles of Zeus before
he arrived at the headship of the gods; and every now and
then he listened into the other room, where they were going
at length into the future of poor Aunt Clothilde.</p>

<p>Clothilde, on this evening, was far and away the happiest
of them all. A smile lighted up her colourless face as she
received congratulations and teasing from all sides; her voice
even broke now and then out of joyful emotion. She had at
last been made a member of the Order of St. John. The Senator
had succeeded by subterranean methods in getting her admitted,
not without some private grumblings about nepotism,
on the part of certain gentlemen. Now the family all discussed
the excellent institution, which was similar to the homes
in Mecklenburg, Dobberthien, and Ribnitz, for ladies from
noble families. The object of these establishments was the
suitable care of portionless women from old and worthy families.
Poor Clothilde was now assured of a small but certain
income, which would increase with the years, and finally, when
she had succeeded to the highest class, would secure her a
decent home in the cloister itself.</p>

<p>Little Hanno stopped awhile with the grown-ups, but soon
strayed back to the dining-room, which displayed a new charm
now that the brilliant light did not fairly dazzle one with its
splendours. It was an extraordinary pleasure to roam about
there, as if on a half-darkened stage after the performance,
and see a little behind the scenes. He touched the lilies on the
big fir-tree, with their golden stamens; handled the tiny figures
of people and animals in the manger, found the candles
that lighted the transparency for the star of Bethlehem over
the stable; lifted up the long cloth that covered the present-table,
and saw quantities of wrapping-paper and pasteboard
boxes stacked beneath.</p>

<p>The conversation in the landscape-room was growing less
and less agreeable. Inevitably, irresistibly, it had arrived at
the one dismal theme which had been in everybody’s mind,
but which they had thus far avoided, as a tribute to the festal
evening. Hugo Weinschenk himself dilated upon it, with a
wild levity of manner and gesture. He explained certain details
of the procedure—the examination of witnesses had now
been interrupted by the Christmas recess—condemned the very
obvious bias of the President, Dr. Philander, and poured scorn
on the attitude which the Public Prosecutor, Dr. Hagenström,
thought it proper to assume toward himself and the witnesses
for the defence. Breslauer had succeeded in drawing the sting
of several of his most slanderous remarks; and he had assured
the Director that, for the present, there need be no fear of a
conviction. The Senator threw in a question now and then,
out of courtesy; and Frau Permaneder, sitting on the sofa
with elevated shoulders, would utter fearful imprecations
against Dr. Moritz Hagenström. But the others were silent:
so profoundly silent that the Director at length fell silent too.
For little Hanno, over in the dining-room, the time sped by
on angels’ wings; but in the landscape-room there reigned an
oppressive silence, which dragged on till Christian came back
from the club, where he had celebrated Christmas with the
bachelors and good fellows.</p>

<p>The cold stump of a cigar hung between his lips, and his
haggard cheeks were flushed. He came through the dining-room
and said, as he entered the landscape-room, “Well, children,
the tree was simply gorgeous. Weinschenk, we ought
to have had Breslauer come to see it. He has never seen anything
like it, I am sure.”</p>

<p>He encountered one of his mother’s quiet, reproachful side-glances,
and returned it with an easy, unembarrassed questioning
look. At nine o’clock the party sat down to supper.</p>

<p>It was laid, as always on these occasions, in the pillared
hall. The Frau Consul recited the ancient grace with sincere
conviction:</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“Come, Lord Jesus, be our guest,</div>
<div class="verse">And bless the bread thou gavest us”</div>
</div></div>

<p>—to which, as usual on the holy evening, she added a brief
prayer, the substance of which was an admonition to remember
those who, on this blessed night, did not fare so well
as the Buddenbrook family. This accomplished, they all sat
down with good consciences to a lengthy repast, beginning
with carp and butter sauce and old Rhine wine.</p>

<p>The Senator put two fish-scales into his pocket, to help him
save money during the coming year. Christian, however, ruefully
remarked that he hadn’t much faith in the prescription;
and Consul Kröger had no need of it. His pittance had long
since been invested securely, beyond the reach of fluctuations
in the exchange. The old man sat as far away as possible
from his wife, to whom he hardly ever spoke nowadays. She
persisted in sending money to Jacob, who was still roaming
about, nobody knew where, unless his mother did. Uncle
Justus scowled forbiddingly when the conversation, with the
advent of the second course, turned upon the absent members
of the family, and he saw the foolish mother wipe her eyes.
They spoke of the Frankfort Buddenbrooks and the Duchamps
in Hamburg, and of Pastor Tibertius in Riga, too, without any
ill-will. And the Senator and his sister touched glasses in
silence to the health of Messrs Grünlich and Permaneder—for,
after all, did they not in a sense belong to the family too?</p>

<p>The turkey, stuffed with chestnuts, raisins, and apples, was
universally praised. They compared it with other years, and
decided that this one was the largest for a long time. With
the turkey came roast potatoes and two kinds of compote, and
each dish held enough to satisfy the appetite of a family all by
itself. The old red wine came from the firm of Möllendorpf.</p>

<p>Little Johann sat between his parents and choked down with
difficulty a small piece of white meat with stuffing. He could
not begin to compete with Aunt Tilda, and he felt tired and
out of sorts. But it was a great thing none the less to be dining
with the grown-ups, and to have one of the beautiful little
rolls with poppy-seed in his elaborately folded serviette,
and three wine-glasses in front of his place. He usually
drank out of the little gold mug which Uncle Justus gave him.
But when the red, white, and brown meringues appeared, and
Uncle Justus poured some oily, yellow Greek wine into the
smallest of the three glasses, his appetite revived. He ate a
whole red ice, then half a white one, then a little piece of
the chocolate, his teeth hurting horribly all the while. Then
he sipped his sweet wine gingerly and listened to Uncle
Christian, who had begun to talk.</p>

<p>He told about the Christmas celebration at the club, which
had been very jolly, it seemed. “Good God!” he said, just
as if he were about to relate the story of Johnny Thunderstorm,
“those fellows drank Swedish punch just like water.”</p>

<p>“Ugh!” said the Frau Consul shortly, and cast down her eyes.</p>

<p>But he paid no heed. His eyes began to wander—and
thought and memory became so vivid that they flickered like
shadows across his haggard face.</p>

<p>“Do any of you know,” he asked, “how it feels to drink too
much Swedish punch? I don’t mean getting drunk: I mean
the feeling you have the next day—the after-effects. They
are very queer and unpleasant; yes, queer and unpleasant at
the same time.”</p>

<p>“Reason enough for describing them,” said the Senator.</p>

<p>“<i>Assez</i>, Christian. That does not interest us in the least,”
said the Frau Consul. But he paid no attention. It was his
peculiarity that at such times nothing made any impression on
him. He was silent awhile, and then it seemed that the thing
which moved him was ripe for speech.</p>

<p>“You go about feeling ghastly,” he said, turning to his
brother and wrinkling up his nose. “Headache, and upset
stomach—oh, well, you have that with other things, too.
But you feel <i>filthy</i>”—here he rubbed his hands together, his
face entirely distorted. “You wash your hands, but it does
no good; they feel dirty and clammy, and there is grease
under the nails. You take a bath: no good, your whole body
is sticky and unclean. You itch all over, and you feel disgusted
with yourself. Do you know the feeling, Thomas?
you do know it, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” said the Senator, making a gesture of repulsion
with his hand. But Christian’s extraordinary tactlessness
had so increased with the years that he never perceived how
unpleasant he was making himself to the company, nor how
out of place his conversation was in these surroundings and
on this evening. He continued to describe the evil effects of
too much Swedish punch; and when he felt that he had
exhausted the subject, he gradually subsided.</p>

<p>Before they arrived at the butter and cheese, the Frau
Consul found occasion for another little speech to her family.
If, she said, not quite everything in the course of the years
had gone as we, in our short-sightedness, desired, there
remained such manifold blessings as should fill our hearts
with gratitude and love. For it was precisely this mingling
of trials with blessings which showed that God never lifted
his hand from the family, but ever guided its destinies
according to His wise design, which we might not seek to
question. And now, with hopeful hearts, we might drink
together to the family health and to its future—that future
when all the old and elderly of the present company would
be laid to rest; and to the children, to whom the Christmas
feast most properly belonged.</p>

<p>As Director Weinschenk’s small daughter was no longer
present, little Johann had to make the round of the table
alone and drink severally with all the company, from Grandmamma
to Mamsell Severin. When he came to his father, the
Senator touched the child’s glass with his and gently lifted
Hanno’s chin to look into his eyes. But his son did not
meet his glance: the long, gold-brown lashes lay deep, deep
upon the delicate bluish shadows beneath his eyes.</p>

<p>Therese Weichbrodt took his head in both her hands, kissed
him explosively on both cheeks, and said with such a hearty
emphasis that surely God must have heeded it, “Be happy,
you good che-ild!”</p>

<p>An hour later Hanno lay in his little bed, which now
stood in the ante-chamber next to the Senator’s dressing-room.
He lay on his back, out of regard for his stomach,
which feeling was far from pleasant over all the things he
had put into it that evening. Ida came out of her room in
her dressing-gown, waving a glass about in circles in the
air in order to dissolve its contents. He drank the carbonate
of soda down quickly, made a wry face, and fell back
again.</p>

<p>“I think I’ll just have to give it all up, Ida,” he
said.</p>

<p>“Oh, nonsense, Hanno. Just lie still on your back. You
see, now: who was it kept making signs to you to stop eating,
and who was it that wouldn’t do it?”</p>

<p>“Well, perhaps I’ll be all right. When will the things
come, Ida?”</p>

<p>“To-morrow morning, first thing, my dearie.”</p>

<p>“I wish they were here—I wish I had them now.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, my dearie—but just have a good sleep now.”
She kissed him, put out the light, and went away.</p>

<p>He lay quietly, giving himself up to the operation of the
soda he had taken. But before his eyes gleamed the dazzling
brilliance of the Christmas tree. He saw his theatre and
his harmonium, and his book of mythology; he heard the
choir-boys singing in the distance: “Rejoice, Jerusalem!”
Everything sparkled and glittered. His head felt dull and
feverish; his heart, affected by the rebellious stomach, beat
strong and irregularly. He lay for long, in a condition of
mingled discomfort, excitement, and reminiscent bliss, and
could not fall asleep.</p>

<p>Next day there would be a third Christmas party, at
Fräulein Weichbrodt’s. He looked forward to it as to a comic
performance in the theatre. Therese Weichbrodt had given
up her <i>pensionnat</i> in the past year. Madame Kethelsen now
occupied the first storey of the house on the Mill Brink, and
she herself the ground floor, and there they lived alone.
The burden of her deformed little body grew heavier with
the years, and she concluded, with Christian humility and
submission, that the end was not far off. For some years now
she had believed that each Christmas was her last; and she
strove with all the powers at her command to give a departing
brilliance to the feast that was held in her small overheated
rooms. Her means were very narrow, and she gave
away each year a part of her possessions to swell the heap
of gifts under the tree: knick-knacks, paper-weights, emery-bags,
needle-cushions, glass vases, and fragments of her
library, miscellaneous books of every shape and size. Books
like “The Secret Journal of a Student of Himself,” Hebel’s
“Alemannian Poems,” Krummacher’s “Parables”—Hanno had
once received an edition of the “Pensées de Blaise Pascal,”
in such tiny print that it had to be read with a glass.</p>

<p>Bishop flowed in streams, and Sesemi’s gingerbread was
very spicy. But Fräulein Weichbrodt abandoned herself with
such trembling emotion to the joys of each Christmas party
that none of them ever went off without a mishap. There was
always some small catastrophe or other to make the guests
laugh and enhance the silent fervour of the hostess’ mien.
A jug of bishop would be upset and overwhelm everything
in a spicy, sticky red flood. Or the decorated tree would
topple off its wooden support just as they solemnly entered
the room. Hanno fell asleep with the mishap of the previous
year before his eyes. It had happened just before the gifts
were given out. Therese Weichbrodt had read the Christmas
chapter, in such impressive accents that all the vowels got
inextricably commingled, and then retreated before her guests
to the door, where she made a little speech. She stood upon
the threshold, humped and tiny, her old hands clasped before
her childish bosom, the green silk cap-ribbons falling over
her fragile shoulders. Above her head, over the door, was a
transparency, garlanded with evergreen, that said “Glory to
God in the Highest.” And Sesemi spoke of God’s mercy; she
mentioned that this was her last Christmas, and ended by
reminding them that the words of the apostle commended
them all to joy—wherewith she trembled from head to foot,
so much did her whole poor little body share in her emotions.
“Rejoice!” said she, laying her head on one side and nodding
violently: “and again I say unto you, rejoice!” But at this
moment the whole transparency, with a puffing, crackling,
spitting noise, went up in flames, and Mademoiselle Weichbrodt
gave a little shriek and a side-spring of unexpected
picturesqueness and agility, and got herself out of the way
of the rain of flying sparks.</p>

<p>As Hanno recalled the leap which the old spinster performed,
he giggled nervously for several minutes into his
pillow.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Frau Permaneder</span> was going along Broad Street in a great
hurry. There was something abandoned about her air: she
showed almost none of the impressive bearing usual to her on
the street. Hunted and harassed, in almost violent haste, she
had as it were been able to save only a remnant of her dignity—like
a beaten king who gathers what is left of his army
about him to seek safety in the arms of flight.</p>

<p>She looked pitiable indeed. Her upper lip, that arched
upper lip that had always done its share to give charm to
her face, was quivering now, and the eyes were large
with apprehension. They were very bright and stared fixedly
ahead of her, as though they too were hurrying onward.
Her hair came in disorder from under her close hat, and her
face showed the pale yellow tint which it always had when
her digestion took a turn for the worse.</p>

<p>Her digestion was obviously worse in these days. The
family noticed that on Thursdays. And no matter how hard
every one tried to keep off the rocks, the conversation
always made straight for them and stuck there: on the subject
of Hugo Weinschenk’s trial. Frau Permaneder herself
led up to it. She would call on God and her fellow men to
tell her how Public Prosecutor Moritz Hagenström could
sleep of nights. For her part, she could not understand it—she
never would! Her agitation increased with every word.
“Thank you, I can’t eat,” she would say, and push away her
plate. She would elevate her shoulders, toss her head,
and in the height of her passion fall back upon the practice,
acquired in her Munich years, of taking nothing but beer,
cold Bavarian beer, poured into an empty stomach, the
nerves of which were in rebellion and would revenge
themselves bitterly. Toward the end of the meal she always
had to get up and go down to the garden or the
court, where she suffered the most dreadful fits of nausea,
leaning upon Ida Jungmann or Riekchen Severin. Her
stomach would finally relieve itself of its contents, and
contract with spasms of pain, which sometimes lasted
for minutes and would continue at intervals for a long
time.</p>

<p>It was about three in the afternoon, a windy, rainy
January day. Frau Permaneder turned the corner at Fishers’
Lane and hurried down the steep declivity to her brother’s
house. After a hasty knock she went from the court straight
into the bureau, her eye flying across the desks to where the
Senator sat in his seat by the window. She made such an imploring
motion with her head that he put down his pen without
more ado and went to her.</p>

<p>“Well?” he said, one eyebrow lifted.</p>

<p>“A moment, Thomas—it’s very pressing; there’s no time to
waste.”</p>

<p>He opened the baize door of his private office, closed it
behind him when they were both inside, and looked at his
sister inquiringly.</p>

<p>“Tom,” she said, her voice quavering, wringing her hands
inside her muff, “you must give it to us—lay it out for us—you
will, won’t you?—the money for the bond, I mean. We
haven’t it—where should we get twenty-five thousand marks
from, I should like to know? You will get them back—you’ll
get them back all too soon, I’m afraid. You understand—the
thing is this: in short, they have reached a point
where Hagenström demands immediate arrest or else a bond
of twenty-five thousand marks. And Weinschenk will give
you his word not to stir from the spot—”</p>

<p>“Has it really come to that?” the Senator said, shaking his
head.</p>

<p>“Yes, they have succeeded in getting that far, the villains!”
Frau Permaneder sank upon the sofa with an impotent sob.
“And they will go on; they will go on to the end, Tom.”</p>

<p>“Tony,” he said, and sat down sidewise by his mahogany
desk, crossing one leg over the other and leaning his head on
his hand, “tell me straight out, do you still have faith in his
innocence?”</p>

<p>She sobbed once or twice before she answered, hopelessly:
“Oh, no, Tom. How could I? I’ve seen so much evil in the
world. I haven’t believed in it from the beginning, even,
though I tried my very best. Life makes it so very hard,
you know, to believe in any one’s innocence. Oh, no—I’ve
had doubts of his good conscience for a long time, and Erica
has not known what to make of him—she confessed it to me,
with tears—on account of his behaviour at home. We haven’t
talked about it, of course. He got ruder and ruder, and kept
demanding all the time that Erica should be lively and divert
his mind and make him forget his troubles. And he broke
the dishes when she wasn’t. You can’t imagine what it was
like, when he shut himself up evenings with his papers: when
anybody knocked, you could hear him jump up and shout
‘Who’s there?’”</p>

<p>They were silent.</p>

<p>“But suppose he <i>is</i> guilty, Tom. Suppose he did do it,”
began Frau Permaneder afresh, and her voice gathered
strength. “He wasn’t working for his own pocket, but for the
company—and then—good Heavens, in this life, people have
to realize—there are other things to be taken into consideration.
He married into our family—he is one of us, now.
They can’t just go and stick him into prison like that!”</p>

<p>He shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>“What are you shrugging your shoulders for, Tom? Do
you mean that you are willing to sit down under the last and
crowning insult these adventurers think they can offer us?
We must do something! He mustn’t be convicted! Aren’t
you the Burgomaster’s right hand? My God, can’t the Senate
just pardon him if it likes? You know, before I came to you,
I nearly went to Cremer, to get him—to implore him to intervene
and take a stand in the matter—he is Chief of
Police—”</p>

<p>“Oh, child, that is all just nonsense.”</p>

<p>“Nonsense, Tom? And Erica? And the child?” said she,
lifting up her muff, with her two imploring hands inside. She
was still a moment, she let her arms fall, her chin began
to quiver, and two great tears ran down from under her drooping
lids. She added softly, “And me?”</p>

<p>“Oh, Tony, be brave,” said the Senator. Her helplessness
went through him. He pushed his chair up to hers and
stroked her hair, in an effort to console her. “Everything
isn’t over, yet. Perhaps it will come out all right. Of course
I will give you the money—that goes without saying—and
Breslauer’s very clever.”</p>

<p>She shook her head, weeping.</p>

<p>“No, Tom, it will not come out all right. I’ve no hope
that it will. They will convict him, and put him in prison—and
then the hard time will come for Erica and me. Her
dowry is gone: it all went to the setting-out, the furniture and
pictures; we sha’n’t get a quarter of it back by selling. And
the salary was always spent. We never put a penny by. We
will go back to Mother, if she will take us, until he is free.
And then where can we go? We’ll just have to sit on the
rocks.” She sobbed.</p>

<p>“On the rocks?”</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s just an expression—a figure. What I mean
is, it won’t turn out all right. I’ve had too much to bear—I
don’t know how I came to deserve it all—but I can’t hope
any more. Erica will be like me—with Grünlich and Permaneder.
But now you can see just how it is—and how it all
comes over you! Could I help it? Could any one help it, I
ask you, Tom?” she repeated drearily, and looked at him with
her tear-swimming eyes. “Everything I’ve ever undertaken
has gone wrong and turned to misfortune—and I’ve meant
everything so well. God knows I have! And now this too— This
is the last straw—the very last.”</p>

<p>She wept, leaning on the arm which he gently put about her:
wept over her ruined life and the quenching of this last
hope.</p>

<p>A week later, Herr Director Hugo Weinschenk was sentenced
to three and a half years’ imprisonment, and arrested
at once.</p>

<p>There was a very large crowd at the final session. Lawyer
Breslauer of Berlin made a speech for the defence the like
of which had never been heard before. Gosch the broker
went about for weeks afterward bursting with enthusiasm for
the masterly pathos and irony it displayed. Christian
Buddenbrook heard it too, and afterward got behind a table
at the club, with a pile of newspapers in front of him, and
reproduced the whole speech. At home he declared that
jurisprudence was the finest profession there was, and he
thought it would just have suited him. The Public Prosecutor
himself, Dr. Moritz Hagenström, who was a great connoisseur,
said in private that the speech had been a genuine treat to him.
But the famous advocate’s talents did not prevent his colleagues
from thumping him on the back and telling him he
had not pulled the wool over their eyes.</p>

<p>The necessary sale followed upon the disappearance of the
Director; and when it was over, people in town began
gradually to forget about Hugo Weinschenk. But the Misses
Buddenbrook, sitting on Thursday at the family table,
declared that they had known the first moment, from the man’s
eyes, that he was not straight, that his conscience was bad,
and that there would be trouble in the end. Certain considerations,
which they wished now they had not regarded, had
led them to suppress these painful observations.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h2 class="nobreak">PART NINE</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Senator Buddenbrook</span> followed the two gentlemen, old Dr.
Grabow and young Dr. Langhals, out of the Frau Consul’s bed-chamber
into the breakfast-room and closed the door.</p>

<p>“May I ask you to give me a moment, gentlemen?” he said,
and led them up the steps, through the corridor, and into the
landscape-room, where, on account of the raw, damp weather,
the stove was already burning. “You will understand my
anxiety,” he said. “Sit down and tell me something reassuring,
if possible.”</p>

<p>“Zounds, my dear Senator,” answered Dr. Grabow, leaning
back comfortably, his chin in his neck-cloth, his hat-brim
propped in both hands against his stomach. Dr. Langhals
put his top-hat down on the carpet beside him and regarded
his hands, which were exceptionally small and covered with
hair. He was a heavy dark man with a pointed beard, a
pompadour hair-cut, beautiful eyes, and a vain expression.</p>

<p>“There is positively no reason for serious disquiet at
present,” Dr. Grabow went on. “When we take into consideration
our honoured patient’s powers of resistance—my
word, I think, as an old and tried councillor, I ought to know
what that resistance is—it is simply astonishing, for her
years, I must say.”</p>

<p>“Yes, precisely: for her years,” said the Senator, uneasily,
twisting his moustaches.</p>

<p>“I don’t say,” went on Dr. Grabow, in his gentle voice,
“that your dear Mother will be walking out to-morrow. You
can tell that by looking at her, of course. There is no denying
that the inflammation has taken a disappointing turn in the
last twenty-four hours. The chill yesterday afternoon did not
please me at all, and to-day there is actually pain in the
side. And some fever—oh, nothing to speak of, but still— In
short, my dear Senator, we shall probably have to reckon
with the troublesome fact that the lung is slightly affected.”</p>

<p>“Inflammation of the lungs then?” asked the Senator, and
looked from one physician to the other.</p>

<p>“Yes—pneumonia,” said Dr. Langhals, with a solemn and
correct bow.</p>

<p>“A slight inflammation, however, and confined to the right
side,” answered the family physician. “We will do our best
to localize it.”</p>

<p>“Then there is ground for serious concern, after all?”
The Senator sat quite still and looked the speaker full in the
face.</p>

<p>“Concern—oh, we must be concerned to limit the affection.
We must ease the cough, and go at the fever energetically.
The quinine will see to that. And by the by, my
dear Senator, let me warn you against feeling alarm over
single symptoms, you know. If the difficulty in breathing
increases, or there should be a little delirium in the night, or
a good deal of discharge to-morrow—a sort of rusty-looking
mucous, with a little blood in it—well, all that is to be
expected, entirely regular and normal. Do reassure dear
Madame Permaneder on this point too—she is nursing the
patient with such devotion.—How is she feeling? I quite
forgot to ask how she has been, in the last few days.”</p>

<p>“She is about as usual,” the Senator said. “I have not
heard of anything new. She is not taking much thought for
her own condition, these days—”</p>

<p>“Of course, of course. And, apropos: your sister needs
rest, especially at night, and Mamsell Severin has not time to
give her all the rest she needs. What about a nurse, my dear
Senator? Why not have one of our good Grey Sisters, in
whom you feel such an interest? The Mother Superior would
be glad to send you one.”</p>

<p>“You consider it necessary?”</p>

<p>“I am only suggesting it. The sisters are invaluable—their
experience and calmness are always so soothing to the
patient, especially in an illness like this, where there is a
succession of disquieting symptoms. Well—let me repeat, no
anxiety, my dear Senator. And we shall see, we shall see.
We will have another talk this evening.”</p>

<p>“Positively,” said Dr. Langhals, took his hat and got up,
with his colleague. But the Senator had not finished: he
had another question, another test to make.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” he said, “one word more. My brother Christian
is a nervous man. He cannot stand much. Do you
advise me to send him word? Should I suggest to him to
come home?”</p>

<p>“Your brother Christian is not in town?”</p>

<p>“No, he is in Hamburg—for a short time, on business, I
understand.”</p>

<p>Dr. Grabow gave his colleague a glance. Then he laughingly
shook the Senator’s hand and said, “Well, we’ll let him
attend to his business in peace. No use upsetting him unnecessarily.
If any change comes which seems to make it
advisable, to quiet the patient, or to raise her spirits—well,
there is plenty of time still, plenty of time.”</p>

<p>The gentlemen traversed the pillared hall and stood on
the steps awhile, talking about other matters: politics,
and the agitations and changes due to the war just then
ended.</p>

<p>“Well, good times will be coming now, eh, Herr Senator?
Money in the country, and fresh confidence everywhere.”</p>

<p>And the Senator partially agreed with him. He said that
the grain trade with Russia had been greatly stimulated since
the outbreak of war, and mentioned the dimensions to which
the import trade in oats had attained—though the profit, it
was true, had been very unevenly divided.</p>

<p>The physicians took their leave, and Senator Buddenbrook
turned to go back to the sick-room. He revolved what Dr.
Grabow had said. He had spoken with reserve—he gave the
impression of avoiding anything definite. The single plain
word was “inflammation of the lungs”; which became no more
reassuring after Dr. Langhals added the scientific terminology.
Pneumonia—at the Frau Consul’s age. The fact that there
were two physicians coming and going was in itself disquieting.
Grabow had arranged that very unobtrusively. He
intended to retire before long, and as young Dr. Langhals
would then be taking over the practice, he, Dr. Grabow,
would be pleased if he might bring him in now and again.</p>

<p>When the Senator entered the darkened room, his mien
appeared alert and his bearing energetic. He was used to
hiding his cares and weariness under an air of calmness
and poise; and the mask glided over his features as
he opened the door, almost as though by a single act of
will.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder sat by the high bed, the hangings of
which were thrust back, and held her mother’s hand. The old
lady was propped up on pillows. She turned her head as her
son came in, and looked searchingly with her pale blue
eyes into his face—a look of calm self-control, yet of
deliberate insistence. Coming as it did, slightly sidewise,
there was almost something sinister about it, too. Two red
spots stood out upon the pallor of her cheeks, but there were
no signs of weakness or exhaustion. The old lady was very
wide awake, more so in fact than those around her—for,
after all, she was the person most concerned. And she mistrusted
this illness; she was not at all disposed to lie down and
let it have its own way.</p>

<p>“What did they say, Thomas?” she asked in a brisk, decided
voice which made her cough directly. She tried to keep
the cough behind her closed lips, but it burst out and made
her put her hand to her side.</p>

<p>“They said,” answered the Senator, when the spasm was
over, stroking her hand, “they said that our dear, good
mother will be up again in a few days. The wretched cough
is responsible for your lying here. The lung is of course
slightly affected—it is not exactly inflammation,” he hastened
to say, as he saw her narrowing gaze, “but even if it were,
that needn’t necessarily be so bad. It might be much worse,”
he finished. “In short, the lung is somewhat irritated, and
they may be right—where is Mamsell Severin?”</p>

<p>“Gone to the chemist’s,” said Frau Permaneder.</p>

<p>“Yes, you see. She has gone to the chemist’s again, and
you look as though you might go to sleep any minute, Tony.
No, it isn’t good enough. If only for a day or so, we should
have a nurse in, don’t you think so? I will find out if
my Mother Superior up at the Grey Sisters has any one
free.”</p>

<p>“Thomas,” said the Frau Consul, this time in a more
cautious voice, so as not to let loose another cough, “believe
me, you cause a good deal of feeling by your protection of the
Catholic order against the black Protestant Sisters. You
have shown the Catholics a distinct preference. Pastor
Pringsheim complained to me about it very strenuously a little
time ago.”</p>

<p>“Well, he needn’t. I am convinced that the Grey Sisters
are more faithful, devoted, and self-sacrificing than the
Black ones are. The Protestants aren’t the real thing. They
all marry the first chance they get. They are worldly,
egotistical, and ordinary, while the Grey Sisters are perfectly
disinterested. I am sure they are much nearer Heaven. And
they are better for us for the very reason that they owe me
some gratitude. What should we have done without Sister
Leandra when Hanno had convulsions? I only hope she is
free!”</p>

<p>And Sister Leandra came. She put down her cloak and
little handbag, took off the grey veil which she wore on the
street over her white one, and went softly about her work, in
her gentle, friendly way, the rosary at her waist clicking
as she moved. She remained a day and a night with the
querulous, not always patient sufferer, and then withdrew,
almost apologetic over the human weakness that enforced a
little repose. She was replaced by another sister, but came
back again after she had slept.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul required constant attendance at her bedside.
The worse her condition grew, the more she bent all
her thoughts and all her energies upon her illness, for
which she felt a naïve hatred. Nearly all her life she had
been a woman of the world, with a quiet, native, and
permanent love of life and good living. Yet she had filled
her latter years with piety and charitable deeds: largely out
of loyalty toward her dead husband, but also, perhaps, by
reason of an unconscious impulse which bade her make her
peace with Heaven for her own strong vitality, and induce it to
grant her a gentle death despite the tenacious clutch she had
always had on life. But the gentle death was not to be hers.
Despite many a sore trial, her form was quite unbowed, her
eyes still clear. She still loved to set a good table, to dress
well and richly, to ignore events that were unpleasant, and to
share with complacency in the high regard that was everywhere
felt for her son. And now this illness, this inflammation
of the lungs, had attacked her erect form without any
previous warning, without any preparation to soften the blow.
There had been no spiritual anticipation, none of that mining
and sapping of the forces which slowly, painfully estranges us
from life and rouses in us the sweet longing for a better
world, for the end, for peace. No, the old Frau Consul,
despite the spiritual courses of her latter years, felt scarce
prepared to die; and she was filled with agony of spirit at
the thought that if this were indeed the end, then this illness,
of itself, in awful haste, in the last hour, must, with
bodily torments, break down her spirit and bring her to
surrender.</p>

<p>She prayed much; but almost more she watched, as often as
she was conscious, over her own condition: felt her pulse,
took her temperature, and fought her cough. But the pulse
was poor, the temperature mounted after falling a little, and
she passed from chills to fever and delirium; her cough increased,
bringing up a blood-impregnated mucous, and she
was alarmed by the difficulty she had in breathing. It was
accounted for by the fact that now not only a lobe of the
right lung, but the whole right lung, was affected, with even
distinct traces of a process in the left, which Dr. Langhals,
looking at his nails, called hepatization, and about which Dr.
Grabow said nothing at all. The fever wasted the patient
relentlessly. The digestion failed. Slowly, inexorably, the
decline of strength went on.</p>

<p>She followed it. She took eagerly, whenever she could, the
concentrated nourishment which they gave her. She knew the
hours for her medicines better than the nurse; and she was so
absorbed in watching the progress of her case that she hardly
spoke to any one but the physicians, and displayed actual
interest only when talking with them. Callers had been admitted
in the beginning, and the old ladies of her social circle,
pastors’ wives and members of the Jerusalem evenings, came
to see her; but she received them with apathy and soon dismissed
them. Her relatives felt the difference in the old
lady’s greeting: it was almost disdainful, as though she were
saying to them: “You can’t do anything for me.” Even
when little Hanno came, in a good hour, she only stroked his
cheek and turned away. Her manner said more plainly than
words: “Children, you are all very good—but—perhaps—I
may be dying!” She received the two physicians, on the
other hand, with very lively interest, and went into the details
of her condition.</p>

<p>One day the Gerhardt ladies appeared, the descendants of
Paul Gerhardt. They came in their mantles, with their flat
shepherdess hats and their provision-baskets, from visiting
the poor, and could not be prevented from seeing their sick
friend. They were left alone with her, and God only knows
what they said as they sat at her bedside. But when they
departed, their eyes and their faces were more gentle, more radiant,
more blissfully remote than ever; while the Frau Consul
lay within, with just such eyes and just such an expression,
quite still, quite peaceful, more peaceful than ever before;
her breath came very softly and at long intervals, and she
was visibly declining from weakness to weakness. Frau Permaneder
murmured a strong word in the wake of the Gerhardt
ladies, and sent at once for the physicians. The two gentlemen
had barely entered the sick-chamber when a surprising
alteration took place in the patient. She stirred, she moved,
she almost sat up. The sight of her trusted and faithful
professional advisers brought her back to earth at a bound.
She put out her hands to them and began: “Welcome, gentlemen.
To-day, in the course of the day—”</p>

<p>The illness had attacked both lungs—of that there was no
more room for doubt.</p>

<p>“Yes, my dear Senator,” Dr. Grabow said, and took
Thomas Buddenbrook by the hand, “it is now both lungs—we
have not been able to prevent it. That is always serious,
you know as well as I do. I should not attempt to deceive you.
No matter what the age of the patient, the condition is
serious; and if you ask me again to-day whether in my
opinion your brother should be written to—or perhaps a
telegram would be better—I should hesitate to deter you from
it. How is he, by the way? A good fellow, Christian; I’ve
always liked him immensely.—But for Heaven’s sake, my dear
Senator, don’t draw any exaggerated conclusions from what I
say. There is no immediate danger—I am foolish to take the
word in my mouth! But still—under the circumstances, you
know, one must reckon with the unexpected. We are very
well satisfied with your mother as a patient. She helps all
she can, she doesn’t leave us in the lurch; no, on my word, she
is an incomparable patient! So there is still great hope, my
dear sir. And we must hope for the best.”</p>

<p>But there is a moment when hope becomes something artificial
and insincere. There is a change in the patient. He alters—there
is something strange about him—he is not as he
was in life. He speaks, but we do not know how to reply:
what he says is strange, it seems to cut off his retreat back to
life, it condemns him to death. And when that moment
comes, even if he is our dearest upon this earth, we do not
know how to wish him back. If we could bid him arise and
walk, he would be as frightful as one risen from his coffin.</p>

<p>Dreadful symptoms of the coming dissolution showed themselves,
even though the organs, still in command of a tenacious
will, continued to function. It had now been weeks since
Frau Consul first took to her bed with a cold; and she began
to have bed sores. They would not heal, and grew worse and
worse. She could not sleep, because of pain, coughing and
shortness of breath, and also because she herself clung to consciousness
with all her might. Only for minutes at a time did
she lose herself in fever; but now she began, even when she
was conscious, to talk to people who had long been dead.
One afternoon, in the twilight, she said suddenly, in a loud,
fervent, anxious voice, “Yes, my dear Jean, I am coming!”
And the immediacy of the reply was such that one almost
thought to hear the voice of the deceased Consul calling her.</p>

<p>Christian arrived. He came from Hamburg, where he had
been, he said, on business. He only stopped a short time in
the sick-room, and left it, his eyes roving wildly, rubbing his
forehead, and saying “It’s frightful—it’s frightful—I can’t
stand it any longer.”</p>

<p>Pastor Pringsheim came, measured Sister Leandra with a
chilling glance, and prayed with a beautifully modulated voice
at the bedside.</p>

<p>Then came the brief “lightening”: the flickering up of the
dying flame. The fever slackened; there was a deceptive return
of strength, and a few plain, hopeful words, that
brought tears of joy to the eyes of the watchers at the bedside.</p>

<p>“Children, we shall keep her; you’ll see, we shall keep her
after all!” cried Thomas Buddenbrook. “She will be with
us next Christmas!”</p>

<p>But even in the next night, shortly after Gerda and her husband
had gone to bed, they were summoned back to Meng
Street by Frau Permaneder, for the mother was struggling
with death. A cold rain was falling, and a high wind drove
it against the window-panes.</p>

<p>The bed-chamber, as the Senator and his wife entered it,
was lighted by two sconces burning on the table; and both
physicians were present. Christian too had been summoned
from his room, and sat with his back to the bed and his forehead
bowed in his hands. They had sent for the dying woman’s
brother, Justus Kröger, and he would shortly be here.
Frau Permaneder and Erica were sobbing softly at the foot of
the bed. Sister Leandra and Mamsell Severin had nothing
more to do, and stood gazing in sadness on the face of the
dying.</p>

<p>The Frau Consul lay on her back, supported by a quantity
of pillows. With both her blue-veined hands, once so beautiful,
now so emaciated, she ceaselessly stroked the coverlet
in trembling haste. Her head in the white nightcap moved
from side to side with dreadful regularity. Her lips were
drawn inward, and opened and closed with a snap at every
tortured effort to breathe, while the sunken eyes roved back
and forth or rested with an envious look on those who stood
about her bed, up and dressed and able to breathe. They
were alive, they belonged to life; but they could help her no
more than this, to make the sacrifice that consisted in watching
her die.... And the night wore on, without any change.</p>

<p>“How long can it go on, like this?” asked Thomas Buddenbrook,
in a low tone, drawing Dr. Grabow away to the bottom
of the room, while Dr. Langhals was undertaking some sort of
injection to give relief to the patient. Frau Permaneder, her
handkerchief in her hand, followed her brother.</p>

<p>“I can’t tell, my dear Senator,” answered Dr. Grabow.
“Your dear mother may be released in the next few minutes, or
she may live for hours. It is a process of strangulation: an
oedema—”</p>

<p>“I know,” said Frau Permaneder, and nodded while the tears
ran down her cheeks. “It often happens in cases of inflammation
of the lungs—a sort of watery fluid forms, and when it
gets very bad the patient cannot breathe any more. Yes, I
know.”</p>

<p>The Senator, his hands folded, looked over at the bed.</p>

<p>“How frightfully she must suffer,” he whispered.</p>

<p>“No,” Dr. Grabow said, just as softly, but in a tone of
authority, while his long, mild countenance wrinkled more
than ever. “That is a mistake, my dear friend, believe me.
The consciousness is very clouded. These are largely reflex
motions which you see; depend upon it.” And Thomas
answered: “God grant it”—but a child could have seen from
the Frau Consul’s eyes that she was entirely conscious and
realized everything.</p>

<p>They took their places again. Consul Kröger came and sat
bowed over his cane at the bedside, with reddened eyelids.</p>

<p>The movements of the patient increased. This body, delivered
over to death, was possessed by a terrible unrest, an unspeakable
craving, an abandonment of helplessness, from head
to foot. The pathetic, imploring eyes now closed with the rustling
movement of the head from side to side, now opened with a
heart-breaking expression, so wide that the little veins of the
eyeballs stood out blood-red. And she was still conscious!</p>

<p>A little after three, Christian got up. “I can’t stand it any
more,” he said, and went out, limping, and supporting himself
on the furniture on his way to the door. Erica Weinschenk and
Mamsell Severin had fallen asleep to the monotonous sound of
the raucous breathing, and sat rosy with slumber on their
chairs.</p>

<p>About four it grew much worse. They lifted the patient and
wiped the perspiration from her brow. Her breathing threatened
to stop altogether. “Let me sleep,” she managed to say.
“Give me a sleeping-draught.” Alas, they could give her nothing
to make her sleep.</p>

<p>Suddenly she began again to reply to voices which the others
could not hear. “Yes, Jean, not much longer now.” And
then, “Yes, dear Clara, I am coming.”</p>

<p>The struggle began afresh. Was this a wrestling with death?
Ah, no, for it had become a wrestling with life for death, on the
part of the dying woman. “I want—,” she panted, “I want—I
cannot—let me sleep! Have mercy, gentlemen—let me
sleep!”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder sobbed aloud as she listened, and Thomas
groaned softly, clutching his head a moment with both hands.
But the physicians knew their duty: they were obliged, under
all circumstances, to preserve life just as long as possible; and
a narcotic would have effected an unresisting and immediate
giving-up of the ghost. Doctors were not made to bring death
into the world, but to preserve life at any cost. There was a
religious and moral basis for this law, which they had known,
once, though they did not have it in mind at the moment. So
they strengthened the heart action by various devices, and even
improved the breathing by causing the patient to retch.</p>

<p>By five the struggle was at its height. The Frau Consul,
erect in convulsions, with staring eyes, thrust wildly about her
with her arms as though trying to clutch after some support or
to reach the hands which she felt stretching toward her. She
was answering constantly in every direction to voices which she
alone heard, and which evidently became more numerous and
urgent. Not only her dead husband and daughter, but her parents,
parents-in-law, and other relatives who had passed before
her into death, seemed to summon her; and she called them
all by name—though the names were some of them not familiar
to her children. “Yes,” she cried, “yes, I am coming now—at
once—a moment—I cannot—oh, let me sleep!”</p>

<p>At half-past five there was a moment of quiet. And then
over her aged and distorted features there passed a look of ineffable
joy, a profound and quivering tenderness; like lightning
she stretched up her arms and cried out, with an immediate
suddenness swift as a blow, so that one felt there was not a
second’s space between what she heard and what she answered,
with an expression of absolute submission and a boundless and
fervid devotion: “Here I am!” and parted.</p>

<p>They were all amazed. What was it? Who had called her?
To whose summons had she responded thus instantly?</p>

<p>Some one drew back the curtains and put out the candles,
and Dr. Grabow gently closed the eyes of the dead.</p>

<p>They all shivered in the autumn dawn that filled the room
with its sallow light. Sister Leandra covered the mirror of the
toilet table with a cloth.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Through</span> the open door Frau Permaneder could be seen
praying in the chamber of death. She knelt there alone, at
a chair near the bed, with her mourning garments flowing about
her on the floor. While she prayed, her hands folded before
her on the seat of the chair, she could hear her brother and
sister-in-law in the breakfast-room, where they stood and
waited for the prayer to come to an end. But she did not
hurry on that account. She finished, coughed her usual little
dry cough, gathered her gown about her, and rose from the
chair, then moved toward her relatives with a perfectly
dignified bearing in which there was no trace of confusion.</p>

<p>“Thomas,” she said, with a note of asperity in her voice, “it
strikes me, that as far as Severin is concerned, our blessed
mother was cherishing a viper in her bosom.”</p>

<p>“What makes you think that?”</p>

<p>“I am perfectly furious with her. I shall try to behave
with dignity, but—has the woman any right to disturb us
at this solemn moment by her common ways?”</p>

<p>“What has she been doing?”</p>

<p>“Well in the first place, she is outrageously greedy. She
goes to the wardrobe and takes out Mother’s silk gowns, folds
them over her arm, and starts to retire. ‘Why, Riekchen,’
I say, ‘what are you doing with those?’ ‘Frau Consul
promised me.’ ‘My dear Severin!’ I say, and show her, in a
perfectly ladylike way, what I think of her unseemly haste.
Do you think it did any good? She took not only the silk
gowns, but a bundle of underwear as well, and went out.
I can’t come to blows with her, can I? And it isn’t Severin
alone. There are wash-baskets full of stuff going out of
the house. The servants divide up things before my face—Severin
has the keys to the cupboards. I said to her:
‘Fräulein Severin, I shall be much obliged for the keys.’
And she told me, in good set terms, that I’ve nothing to say
to her, she’s not in my service, I didn’t engage her, and she
will keep the keys until she leaves!”</p>

<p>“Have you the keys to the silver-chest? Good. Let the
rest go. That sort of thing is inevitable when a household
breaks up, especially when the rule has been rather lax
already. I don’t want to make any scenes. The linen is
old and worn. We can see what there is there. Have you
the lists? Good. We’ll have a look at them.”</p>

<p>They went into the bed-chamber and stood a while in
silence by the bed; Frau Antonie removed the white cloth
from the face of the dead. The Frau Consul was arrayed in
the silk garment in which she would that afternoon lie upon
her bier in the hall. Twenty-eight hours had passed since she
drew her last breath. The mouth and chin, without the false
teeth, looked sunken and senile, and the pointed chin projected
sharply. All three tried their best to recognize their
mother’s face in this sunken countenance before them, with
its eyelids inexorably closed. But under the old lady’s
Sunday cap there showed, as in life, the smooth, reddish-brown
wig over which the Misses Buddenbrook had so often
made merry. Flowers were strewn on the coverlet.</p>

<p>“The most beautiful wreaths have come,” said Frau Permaneder.
“From all the families in town, simply from everybody.
I had everything carried up to the corridor. You
must look at them afterwards, Gerda and Tom. They are
heart-breakingly lovely.”</p>

<p>“How are they progressing down in the hall?” asked the
Senator.</p>

<p>“They will soon be done, Tom. Jacobs has taken the
greatest pains. And the—” she choked down a sob—“the
coffin has come. But you must take off your things, my
dears,” she went on, carefully replacing the white cloth over
the face of the dead. “It is cold in here, but there is a little
fire in the breakfast-room. Let me help you, Gerda. Such
an elegant mantle, one must be careful with it. Let me give
you a kiss—you know I love you, even if you have always
despised me. No, I won’t make your hair untidy when I
take off your hat— Your lovely hair! Such hair Mother had
too, when she was young. She was never so splendid as you
are, but there was a time, and since I was born, too, when
she was really beautiful. How true it is, isn’t it, what your
old Grobleben always says: we must all return to earth at
last: such a simple man, too. Here, Tom. These are the
most important lists.”</p>

<p>They returned to the next room and sat down at the round
table, while the Senator took up the paper, on which was a
list of the objects to be divided among the nearest heirs.
Frau Permaneder’s eyes never left her brother’s face, and her
own wore a strained, excited look. There was something in
her mind, a question hard to put, upon which, nevertheless,
all her thoughts were bent, and which must, in the next few
hours, come up for discussion.</p>

<p>“I think,” said the Senator, “we may as well keep to the
usual rule, that presents go back; so—”</p>

<p>His wife interrupted him.</p>

<p>“Pardon me, Thomas. It seems to me—where is Christian?”</p>

<p>“Oh, goodness, yes, Christian!” cried Frau Permaneder.
“We’ve forgotten him!”</p>

<p>She went to ring the bell. But at the same moment Christian
opened the door. He entered rather quickly, closed it
behind him with a slight bang, and stood there frowning, his
little deep round eyes not resting on anybody, but rolling
from side to side. His mouth opened and shut under the
bushy red moustaches. His mood seemed irritated and
defiant.</p>

<p>“I heard you were here,” he said. “If the things are to
be talked about, it is proper that I should be told.”</p>

<p>“We were just about to call you,” the Senator said indifferently.
“Sit down.”</p>

<p>His eyes rested, as he spoke, on the white studs in Christian’s
shirt. He himself was in irreproachable mourning:
a black cloth coat, blinding white shirt set off at the collar
with a black tie, and black studs instead of the gold ones
he usually wore. Christian saw his glance. He drew up
a chair to the table and sat down, saying as he did so, with
a gesture toward his shirt, “I know I have on white studs.
I haven’t got round to buying black—or rather, I haven’t
bothered. In the last few years I’ve seen times when I had
to borrow money for tooth-powder, and go to bed by the light
of a match. I don’t know that I am altogether and entirely
to blame. Anyhow, there are other things in the world more
important than black studs. I don’t set much store by
appearances—I never have.”</p>

<p>Gerda looked at him as he spoke, and now she gave a little
laugh. The Senator remarked: “I doubt if you could bear
out the truth of that last statement.”</p>

<p>“No? Perhaps you know better than I do, Thomas. I say
I don’t set much store by them. I’ve seen too much of the
world, and lived with too many different sorts of men, with
too many different ways, to care what—and anyhow, I am a
grown man”—his voice grew suddenly loud—“I am forty-three
years old, and my own master and in a position to warn
everybody not to mix in my affairs.”</p>

<p>The Senator was quite astonished. “It seems to me you
have something on your mind, my friend,” he said. “As far
as the studs go, I haven’t so much as mentioned them, if
my memory serves me. Wear whatever mourning you
choose, or none at all if that pleases you; but don’t imagine
you make any impression on me with your cheap broad-mindedness—”</p>

<p>“I am not trying to make an impression on you.”</p>

<p>“Tom—Christian!” said Frau Permaneder. “Don’t let us
have any hard words—not to-day—when in the next room—
Just go on, Thomas. Presents are to be returned? That is
only right.”</p>

<p>And Thomas went on. He began with the large things, and
wrote down for himself the articles he could use in his own
house: the candelabra in the dining-room, the great carved
chest that stood in the downstairs entry. Frau Permaneder
paid extraordinarily close attention. No matter what the
article was, the future possession of which was at the moment
in question, she would say with an incomparable air, “Oh,
well, I’m willing to take it”—as if the whole world owed
her thanks for her act of self-sacrifice. She accepted for herself,
her daughter, and her granddaughter far and away the
largest share of the furnishings.</p>

<p>Christian had some pieces of furniture, an Empire table-clock
and the harmonium. He seemed satisfied enough. But
when they came to dividing the table-linen and silver and the
sets of dishes, he displayed, to the great astonishment of the
others, an eagerness that was almost avidity.</p>

<p>“What about me?” he would say. “I must ask you not to
forget me, please.”</p>

<p>“Who is forgetting you? Look: I’ve put a whole tea-service
and a silver tray down to you. I’ve taken the gilt Sunday
service, as we are probably the only ones who would have a
use for it.”</p>

<p>“I’m willing to take the everyday onion pattern,” said
Frau Permaneder.</p>

<p>“And what about me?” cried Christian. He was possessed
now by that excitement which sometimes seized him and sat
so extraordinarily on his haggard cheek. “I certainly want
a share in the dishes. And how many forks and spoons do
I get? Almost none at all, it seems to me.”</p>

<p>“But, my dear man, what do you want of them? You have
no use for them at all. I don’t understand. It is better the
things should continue in the family—”</p>

<p>“But suppose I say I want them—if only in remembrance of
Mother,” Christian cried defiantly.</p>

<p>To which the Senator impatiently replied, “I don’t feel
much like making jokes; but am I to judge from your words
that you would like to put a soup-tureen on your chest of
drawers and keep it there in memory of Mother? Please
don’t get the idea that we want to cheat you out of your
share. If you get less of the effects, you will get more elsewhere.
The same is true of the linen.”</p>

<p>“I don’t want the money. I want the linen and dishes.”</p>

<p>“Whatever for?”</p>

<p>Christian’s reply to this was one that made Gerda Buddenbrook
turn and gaze at him with an enigmatic expression
in her eyes. The Senator hastily donned his pince-nez to
look the better, and Frau Permaneder simply folded her
hands. He said: “Well, I am thinking of getting married,
sooner or later.”</p>

<p>He said this rather low and quickly, with a short gesture,
as though he were tossing something to his brother across
the table. Then he leaned back, avoiding their eyes, looking
surly, defiant, and yet extremely embarrassed. There was
a long pause. At last the Senator broke it by saying:</p>

<p>“I must say, Christian, your ideas come rather late. That
is, of course, if this really is anything serious, and not the
same kind of thing you proposed to Mother a while ago.”</p>

<p>“My intentions have remained what they were,” Christian
said. He did not look at anybody or change his expression.</p>

<p>“That is impossible, I should think. Were you waiting for
Mother’s death—?”</p>

<p>“I had that amount of consideration, yes. You seem to
think, Thomas, that you have a monopoly of all the tact and
feeling in the world—”</p>

<p>“I don’t know what justifies you in making remarks like
that. And, moreover, I must admire the extent of your consideration.
On the day after Mother’s death, you propose to
display your lack of filial feeling by—”</p>

<p>“Only because the subject came up. But the point is that
now Mother cannot be affected by any step I may take—no
more to-day than she would be a year from now. Good Lord,
Thomas, Mother couldn’t have any actual <i>right</i>—but I saw it
from her point of view, and had consideration for that, as
long as she lived. She was an old woman, a woman of a
past generation, with different views about life—”</p>

<p>“I can only say that I concur with her absolutely in this
particular view.”</p>

<p>“I cannot be bothered about that.”</p>

<p>“But you will be bothered about it, my dear sir.”</p>

<p>Christian looked at him.</p>

<p>“No,” he shouted. “I won’t! I can’t do it. Suppose I
tell you I can’t? I must know what I have to do, mustn’t I?
I am a grown man—”</p>

<p>“You don’t in the least know what you have to do. Your
being what you call a grown man is only very external.”</p>

<p>“I know very well what I have to do. In the first place,
I have to act like a man of honour! You don’t know how the
thing stands. With Tony and Gerda here we can’t really talk—but
I have already told you I have responsibilities— The
last child, little Gisela—”</p>

<p>“I know nothing about any little Gisela—and I don’t care
to. I am perfectly convinced they are making a fool of you.
In any case, what sort of responsibility can you have toward a
person like the one you have in mind—other than the legal
one, which you can perform as before—?”</p>

<p>“Person, Thomas, <i>person</i>? You are making a mistake
about her. Aline—”</p>

<p>“Silence!” roared Senator Buddenbrook in a voice like
thunder. The two brothers glared across the table into
each other’s faces. Thomas was pale and trembling with
scorn; the rims of Christian’s deep little eyes had got suddenly
red, his mouth and eyes spread wide open, his lean
cheeks seemed nothing but hollows, and a pair of red patches
showed just under the cheek-bones. Gerda looked rather disdainfully
from one to the other, and Tony wrung her hands,
imploring—“Tom, Christian! And Mother lying there in the
next room!”</p>

<p>“You have no sense of shame,” went on the Senator. “How
can you bring yourself—what must it cost you—to mention
that name, on this spot, under these circumstances? You
have a lack of feeling that amounts to a disease!”</p>

<p>“Will you tell me why I should not mention Aline’s name?”
Christian was so beside himself that Gerda looked at him
with increasing intentness. “I do mention it, as you hear,
Thomas; I intend to marry her—for I have a longing for a
home, and for peace and quiet—and I insist—you hear the
word I use—I insist that you keep out of my affairs. I am
free. I am my own master!”</p>

<p>“Oh, you fool, you! When you hear the will read, you
will see just how much you are your own master! You won’t
get the chance to squander Mother’s inheritance as you have
run through with the thirty thousand marks already! I have
been made the guardian of your affairs, and I will see to it
that you never get your hands on more than a monthly sum at
a time—that I swear!”</p>

<p>“Well, you know better than I who it was that instigated
Mother to make such a will! But I am surprised, very much
so, that Mother did not give the office to somebody that
had a little more brotherly feeling for me than you have.”
Christian no longer knew what he was saying; he leaned over
the table, knocking on it all the while with his knuckle, glaring
up, red-eyed, his moustaches bristling, at his brother, who, on
his side, stood looking down at him, pale, and with half-closed
lids.</p>

<p>Christian went on, and his voice was hollow and rasping.
“Your heart is full of coldness and ill-will toward me, all the
while. As far back as I can remember I have felt cold in
your presence—you freeze me with a perfect stream of icy
contempt. You may think that is a strange expression, but
what I feel is just like that. You repulse me, just by looking
at me—and you hardly ever even so much as look at me. How
have you got a right to treat me like that? You are a man
too, you have your own weaknesses. You have always been a
better son to our parents; but if you really stood so much
closer to them than I do, you might have absorbed a little of
their Christian charity. If you have no brotherly love to
spare for me, you might have had some Christlike love. But
you are entirely without affection. You never came near
me in the hospital, when I lay there and suffered with
rheumatism—”</p>

<p>“I have more serious things to think about than your illnesses.
And my own health—”</p>

<p>“Oh, come, Thomas, your health is magnificent. You
wouldn’t be sitting here for what you are, if your health
weren’t far and away better than mine.”</p>

<p>“I may be perhaps worse off than you are!”</p>

<p>“Worse than I am—come, that’s too much! Gerda, Tony!
He says he is worse off than I am. Perhaps it was you that
came near dying, in Hamburg, of rheumatism. Perhaps you
have had to endure torments in your left side, perfectly indescribable
torments, for every little trifling irregularity!
Perhaps all your nerves are short on the left side! All the
authorities say that is what is the matter with me. Perhaps
it happens to you that you come into your room when it is
getting dark and see a man sitting on the sofa, nodding at you,
when there is no man there?”</p>

<p>“Christian!” Frau Permaneder burst out in horror. “What
are you saying? And, my God! what are you quarrelling
about? Is it an honour for one to be worse off than the
other? If it were, Gerda and I might have something to say,
too.—And with Mother lying in there! How can you?”</p>

<p>“Don’t you realize, you fool,” cried Thomas Buddenbrook,
in a passion, “that all these horrors are the consequence and
effect of your vices, your idleness, and your self-tormenting?
Go to work! Stop petting your condition and talking about
it! If you do go crazy—and I tell you plainly I don’t think
it at all unlikely—I shan’t be able to shed a tear; for it will
be entirely your own fault.”</p>

<p>“No, and when I die you won’t shed any tears either.”</p>

<p>“You won’t die,” said the Senator bitingly.</p>

<p>“I shan’t die? Very good, I shan’t die, then. We’ll see
who dies first. Work! Suppose I can’t work? My God! I
can’t do the same thing long at a time! It kills me. If you
have been able to, and are able to, thank God for it, but
don’t sit in judgment on others, for it isn’t a virtue. God
gives strength to one, and not to another. But that is the way
you are made, Thomas. You are self-righteous. Oh, wait,
that is not what I am going to say, nor what
I accuse you of. I don’t know where to begin, and
however much I can say is only a millionth part of the
feeling I have in my heart against you. You have made a
position for yourself in life; and there you stand, and push
everything away which might possibly disturb your equilibrium
for a moment—for your equilibrium is the most
precious thing in the world to you. But it isn’t the most
precious thing in life, Thomas—no, before God, it is not.
You are an egotist, that is what you are. I am still fond of
you, even when you are angry, and tread on me, and thunder
me down. But when you get silent: when somebody says
something and you are suddenly dumb, and withdraw yourself,
quite elegant and remote, and repulse people like a wall
and leave the other fellow to his shame, without any chance
of justifying himself—! Yes, you are without pity, without
love, without humility.—Oh,” he cried, and stretched both
arms in front of him, palms outward, as though pushing
everything away from him, “Oh, how sick I am of all this
tact and propriety, this poise and refinement—sick to death
of it!”</p>

<p>The outburst was so genuine, so heart-felt, it sounded
so full of loathing and satiety, that it was actually crushing.
Thomas shrank a little and looked down in front of him,
weary and without a word.</p>

<p>At last he said, and his voice had a ring of feeling,
“I have become what I am because I did not want to become
what you are. If I have inwardly shrunk from you, it has
been because I needed to guard myself—your being, and your
existence, are a danger to me—that is the truth.”</p>

<p>There was another pause, and then he went on, in a
crisper tone: “Well, we have wandered far away from the
subject. You have read me a lecture on my character—a
somewhat muddled lecture, with a grain of truth in it. But
we are not talking about me, but about you. You are thinking
of marrying; and I should like to convince you that it is impossible
for you to carry out your plan. In the first place,
the interest I shall be able to pay you on your capital will
not be a very encouraging sum—”</p>

<p>“Aline has put some away.”</p>

<p>The Senator swallowed, and controlled himself. “You
mean you would mingle your mother’s inheritance with the—savings
of this lady?”</p>

<p>“Yes. I want a home, and somebody who will be sympathetic
when I am ill. And we suit each other very well. We
are both rather damaged goods, so to speak—”</p>

<p>“And you intend, further, to adopt the existing children
and legitimize them?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“So that after your death your inheritance would pass to
them?” As the Senator said this, Frau Permaneder laid
her hand on his arm and murmured adjuringly, “Thomas!
Mother is lying in the next room!”</p>

<p>“Yes,” answered Christian. “That would be the way it
would be.”</p>

<p>“Well, you shan’t do it, then,” shouted the Senator, and
sprang up. Christian got behind his chair, which he
clutched with one hand. His chin went down on his breast;
he looked apprehensive as well as angry.</p>

<p>“You shan’t do it,” repeated Thomas, almost senseless
with anger; pale, trembling, jerking convulsively. “As long
as I am alive it won’t happen. I swear it—so take care!
There’s enough money gone already, what with bad luck and
foolishness and rascality, without your throwing a quarter
of Mother’s inheritance into this creature’s lap—and her
bastards’—and that after another quarter has been snapped
up by Tiburtius! You’ve brought enough disgrace on the
family already, without bringing us home a courtesan for a
sister-in-law, and giving our name to her children. I forbid
it, do you hear? I forbid it!” he shouted, in a voice that
made the room ring, and Frau Permaneder squeeze herself
weeping into the corner of the sofa. “And I advise you not to
attempt to defy me! Up to now I have only despised you and
ignored you: but if you try any tricks, if you bring the
worse to the worst, we’ll see who will come out ahead! You
can look out for yourself! I shan’t have any mercy! I’ll
have you declared incompetent, I’ll get you shut up, I’ll ruin
you—I’ll ruin you, you understand?”</p>

<p>“And I tell <i>you</i>—” Thus it all began over again, and
went on and on: a battle of words, destructive, futile,
lamentable, without any purpose other than to insult, to
wound, to cut one another to the quick. Christian came back
to his brother’s character and cited examples of Thomas’s
egotism—painful anecdotes out of the distant past, which he,
Christian, had never forgotten, but carried about with him to
feed his bitterness. And the Senator retorted with scorn, and
with threats which he regretted a moment later. Gerda
leaned her head on her hand and watched them, with an
expression in her eyes impossible to read. Frau Permaneder
repeated over and over again, in her despair: “And Mother
lying there in the next room!”</p>

<p>Christian, who at the end had been walking up and down
in the room, at last forsook the field.</p>

<p>“Very good, we shall see!” he shouted. With his eyes red,
his moustaches ruffled, his handkerchief in his hand, his coat
wide open, hot and beside himself, he went out of the door and
slammed it behind him.</p>

<p>In the sudden stillness the Senator stood for a moment
upright and gazed after his brother. Then he sat down without
a word and took up the papers jerkily. He went curtly
through the remaining business, then leaned back and twisted
his moustaches through his fingers, lost in thought.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder’s anxiety made her heart beat loudly.
The question, the great question, could now not be put off
any longer. It must come up, and he must answer; but was
her brother now in a mood to be governed by gentleness and
filial piety? Alas, she feared not.</p>

<p>“And—Tom—,” she began, looking down into her lap,
and then up, as she made a timid effort to read his thoughts.
“The furniture—you have taken everything into consideration
of course—the things that belong to us, I mean to Erica
and me and the little one, they remain here with us? In
short, the house—what about it?” she finished, and furtively
wrung her hands.</p>

<p>The Senator did not answer at once. He went on for a
while twisting his moustaches and drearily meditating. Then
he drew a deep breath and sat up.</p>

<p>“The house?” he said. “Of course it belongs to all of
us, to you and me, and Christian—and, queerly enough, to
Pastor Tiburtius too. I can’t decide anything about it by myself.
I have to get your consent. But obviously the thing to
do is to sell as soon as possible,” he concluded, shrugging
his shoulders. Yet something crossed his face, after all, as
though he were startled by his own words.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder’s head sank deep on her breast; her
hands stopped pressing themselves together; she relaxed all
over.</p>

<p>“Our consent,” she repeated after a pause, sadly, and
rather bitterly as well. “Dear me, Tom, you know you will
do whatever you think best—the rest of us are not likely to
withhold our consent for long. But if we might put in a
word—to beg you,” she, went on, almost dully, but her lip
was trembling too—“the house—Mother’s house—the family
home, in which we have all been so happy! We must
sell it—?”</p>

<p>The Senator shrugged his shoulders again. “Child, you
will believe me when I tell you that I feel everything you
can say, as much as you do yourself. But those are only our
feelings; they aren’t actual objections. What has to be done,
remains the problem. Here we have this great piece of
property—what shall we do with it? For years back, ever
since Father’s death, the whole back part has been going to
pieces. A family of cats is living rent-free in the billiard-room,
and you can’t walk there for fear of going through the
floor. Of course, if I did not have my house in Fishers’
Lane— But I have, and what should I do with it? Do
you think I might sell that instead? Tell me yourself, to
whom? I should lose half the money I put into it. We have
property enough, Tony; we have far too much, in fact. The
granary buildings, and two great houses. The invested
capital is out of all proportion to the value of the property.
No, no, we must sell.”</p>

<p>But Frau Permaneder was not listening. She was sitting
bent over on the sofa, withdrawn into herself with her own
thoughts.</p>

<p>“Our house,” she murmured. “I remember the housewarming.
We were no bigger than that. The whole family
was there. And Uncle Hoffstede read a poem. It is in the
family papers. I know it by heart. Venus Anadyomene. The
landscape-room. The dining-hall! And strange people—!”</p>

<p>“Yes, Tony. They must have felt the same—the family
of whom Grandfather bought the house. They had lost their
money and had to give up their home, and they are all dead
and gone now. Everything has its time. We ought to be
grateful to God that we are better off than the Ratenkamps,
and are not saying good-bye to the house under such sorry
circumstances as theirs.”</p>

<p>Sobs, long, painful sobs, interrupted him. Frau Permaneder
so abandoned herself to her grief that she did not
even dry the tears that ran down her cheeks. She sat bent
over, and the warm drops fell unheeded upon the hands lying
limp in her lap.</p>

<p>“Tom,” said she, and there was a gentle, touching decision
in her voice, which, a moment before her sobs had threatened
to choke, “you can’t understand how I feel at this hour—you
cannot understand your sister’s feelings! Things have
not gone well with her in this life.—I have had everything
to bear that fate could think of to inflict upon me. But I
have borne it all without flinching, Tom: all my troubles
with Grünlich and Permaneder and Weinschenk. For, however
my life seemed to go awry, I was never quite lost. I
had always a safe haven to fly to. Even this last time,
when everything came to an end, when they took away
Weinschenk to prison, ‘Mother,’ I said, ‘may we come to
you?’ And she said, ‘Yes, my children, come!’ Do you
remember, Tom, when we were little, and played war, there
was always a little spot marked off for us to run to, where
we could be safe and not be touched until we were rested
again? Mother’s house, this house, was my little spot, my
refuge in life, Tom. And now—it must be sold—”</p>

<p>She leaned back, buried her face in her handkerchief, and
wept unrestrainedly.</p>

<p>He drew down one of her hands and held it in his own.</p>

<p>“I know, dear Tony, I know it all. But we must be
sensible. Our dear good Mother is gone. We cannot bring
her back. And so— It is madness to keep the house as dead
capital. Shall we turn it into a tenement-house? I know it
is painful to think of strangers living here; but after all it
is better you should <i>not</i> see it. You must take a nice,
pretty little house or flat somewhere for yourself and your
family—outside the Castle Gate, for example. Or would you
rather stop on here and let out floors to different families?
And you still have the family: Gerda and me, and the
Buddenbrooks in Broad Street, and the Krögers, and Therese
Weichbrodt, and Clothilde—that is, if Clothilde will condescend
to associate with us, now that she’s become a lady of
the Order of St. John—it’s so very exclusive, you know!”</p>

<p>She gave a sigh that was already partly a laugh, and
mopped her eyes with her handkerchief, looking like a hurt
child whom somebody is helping, with a jest, to forget its
pain. Then she resolutely cleared her face and put herself
to rights, tossing her head with the characteristic gesture and
bringing her chin down on her breast.</p>

<p>“Yes, Tom,” she said, and blinked with her tear-reddened
eyes, “I’ll be good now; I am already. You must forgive
me—and you too, Gerda—for breaking down like that. But
it may happen to any one, you know. It is a weakness. But,
believe me, it is only outward. I am a woman steeled by misfortunes.
And that about the dead capital is very convincing
to me, Tom—I’ve enough intelligence to understand that
much, anyhow. I can only repeat that you must do what you
think best. You must think and act for us all; for Gerda
and I are only women, and Christian—well, God help him,
poor soul! We cannot oppose you, for whatever we could
say would be only sentiment, not real objections, it is very
plain. To whom will you sell it, Tom? Do you think it will
go off right away?”</p>

<p>“Ah, child—how do I know? But I talked a little this
morning with old Gosch the broker; he did not seem disinclined
to undertake the business.”</p>

<p>“That is a good idea, Tom. Siegismund Gosch has his
weaknesses, of course. That thing about his translation from
the Spanish—I can’t remember the man’s name, but it
is very odd, one must admit. However, he was Father’s
friend, and he is an honest man through and through.—What
shall you ask? A hundred thousand marks would be the
least, I should think.”</p>

<p>And “A hundred thousand marks would be the least,
wouldn’t it, Tom?” she was still asking, the door-knob in her
hand, as the Senator and his wife went down the steps. Then
she was alone, and stood there in the middle of the room with
her hands clasped palms down in front of her, looking all
around with large, helpless eyes. Her head, heavy with the
weight of her thoughts, adorned with the little black lace
cap, sank slowly, shaking all the while, deeper and deeper on
one shoulder.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Little</span> Johann was to go to take his farewell of his grandmother’s
mortal remains. His father so arranged it, and,
though Hanno was afraid, he made not a syllable of objection.
At table, the day after the Frau Consul’s dying
struggle, the Senator, in his son’s presence and apparently
with design, had commented harshly upon the conduct of
Uncle Christian, who had slipped away and gone to bed
when the patient’s suffering was at its height. “That was his
nerves, Thomas,” Gerda had answered. But with a glance at
Hanno, which had not escaped the child, the Senator had
severely retorted that an excuse was not in place. The agony
of their departed mother had been so sore that one had felt
ashamed even to be sitting there free from pain—not to
mention entertaining the cowardly thought of trying to escape
any suffering of mind called up by the sight. From which,
Hanno had gathered that it would not be safe to object to the
visit to the open coffin.</p>

<p>The room looked as strange to him as it had at Christmas,
when, on the day before the funeral, between his father and
his mother, he entered it from the hall. There was a half-circle
of potted plants, arranged alternately with high silver
candelabra; and against the dark green leaves gleamed from
a black pedestal the marble copy of Thorwaldsen’s Christ,
which belonged in the corridor outside. Black crape hangings
fluttered everywhere in the draught, hiding the sky-blue
tapestries and the smiling immortals who had looked down
from these walls upon so many festive dinner-tables. Little
Johann stood beside the bier among his black-clad relatives.
He had a broad mourning band on his own sailor suit, and
his senses felt misty with the scent from countless bouquets
and wreaths—and with another odour that came wafted now
and then on a current of air, and smelled strange, yet somehow
familiar.</p>

<p>He stood beside the bier and looked at the motionless white
figure stretched out there severe and solemn, amid white satin.
This was not Grandmamma. There was her Sunday cap with
the white silk ribbons, and her red-brown hair beneath it. But
the pinched nose was not hers, nor the drawn lips, nor the
sharp chin, nor the yellow, translucent hands, whose coldness
and stiffness one could see. This was a wax-doll—to dress
it up and lay it out like that seemed rather horrible. He
looked across to the landscape-room, as though the real
Grandmamma might appear there the next minute. But she
did not come: she was dead. Death had turned her for ever
into this wax figure that kept its lids and lips so forbiddingly
closed.</p>

<p>He stood resting on his left leg, the right knee bent, balancing
lightly on the toe, and clutched his sailor knot with one
hand, the other hanging down. He held his head on one side,
the curly light-brown locks swaying over the temples, and
looked with his gold-brown, blue-encircled eyes in brooding
repugnance upon the face of the dead. His breath came long
and shuddering, for he kept expecting that strange, puzzling
odour which all the scent of the flowers sometimes failed to
disguise. When the odour came, and he perceived it, he drew
his brows still more together, his lip trembled, and the long
sigh which he gave was so like a tearless sob that Frau Permaneder
bent over and kissed him and took him away.</p>

<p>And after the Senator and his wife, and Frau Permaneder
and Erica, had received for long hours the condolences of the
entire town, Elisabeth Buddenbrook, born Kröger, was consigned
to earth. The out-of-town families, from Hamburg
and Frankfort, came to the funeral and, for the last time, received
hospitality in Meng Street. And the hosts of the sympathizers
filled the hall and the landscape-room, the corridor
and the pillared hall; and Pastor Pringsheim of St. Mary’s,
erect among burning tapers at the head of the coffin, turning
his face up to heaven, his hands folded beneath his chin,
preached the funeral sermon.</p>

<p>He praised in resounding tones the qualities of the departed:
he praised her refinement and humility, her piety and
cheer, her mildness and her charity. He spoke of the Jerusalem
evenings and the Sunday-school; he gilded with
matchless oratory the whole long rich and happy earthly
course of her who had left them; and when he came to the
end, since the word “end” needed some sort of qualifying adjective,
he spoke of her “peaceful end.”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder was quite aware of the dignity, the representative
bearing, which she owed to herself and the community
in this hour. She, her daughter Erica, and her granddaughter
Elisabeth occupied the most conspicuous places of
honour, close to the pastor at the head of the coffin; while
Thomas, Gerda, Clothilde, and little Johann, as likewise old
Consul Kröger, who had a chair to sit in, were content, as
were the relatives of the second class, to occupy less prominent
places. Frau Permaneder stood there, very erect, her shoulders
elevated, her black-bordered handkerchief between her
folded hands; and her pride in the chief rôle which it fell to
her lot to perform was so great as sometimes entirely to obscure
her grief. Conscious of being the focus of all eyes, she
kept her own discreetly cast down; yet now and again she
could not resist letting them stray over the assembly, in which
she noted the presence of Julchen Möllendorpf, born Hagenström,
and her husband. Yes, they had all had to come:
Möllendorpfs, Kistenmakers, Langhals, Överdiecks—before
Tony Buddenbrook left her parental roof for ever, they had
all gathered here, to offer her, despite Grünlich, despite Permaneder,
despite Hugo Weinschenk, their sympathy and
condolences.</p>

<p>Pastor Pringsheim’s sermon went on, turning the knife in
the wound that death had made: he caused each person present
to remember his own dead, he knew how to make tears flow
where none would have flowed of themselves—and for this
the weeping ones were grateful to him. When he mentioned
the Jerusalem evenings, all the old friends of the dead began
to sob—excepting Madame Kethelsen, who did not hear a
word he said, but stared straight before her with the remote
air of the deaf, and the Gerhardt sisters, the descendants of
Paul, who stood hand in hand in a corner, their eyes glowing.
They were glad for the death of their friend, and could have
envied her but that envy and unkindness were foreign to
their natures.</p>

<p>Poor Mademoiselle Weichbrodt blew her nose all the time,
with a short, emphatic sound. The Misses Buddenbrook did
not weep. It was not their habit. Their bearing, less angular
than usual, expressed a mild satisfaction with the impartial
justice of death.</p>

<p>Pastor Pringsheim’s last “amen” resounded, and the four
bearers, in their black three-cornered hats, their black cloaks
billowing out behind them with the swiftness of their advance,
came softly in and put their hands upon the coffin. They
were four lackeys, known to everybody, who were engaged
to hand the heavy dishes at every large dinner in the best circles,
and who drank Möllendorpf’s claret out of the carafes,
between the courses. But, also, they were indispensable at
every funeral of the first or second class, being of large experience
in this kind of work. They knew that the harshness
of this moment, when the coffin was laid hold upon by strange
hands and borne away from the survivors, must be ameliorated
by tact and swiftness. Their movements were quick, agile,
and noiseless; hardly had any one time to be sensible of the
pain of the situation, before they had lifted the burden from
the bier to their shoulders, and the flower-covered casket
swayed away smoothly and with decorum through the pillared
hall.</p>

<p>The ladies pressed tenderly about Frau Permaneder and her
daughter to offer their sympathy. They took her hand and
murmured, with drooping eyes, precisely no more and no less
than what on such occasions must be murmured; while the
gentlemen made ready to go down to the carriages.</p>

<p>Then came, in a long, black procession, the slow drive
through the grey, misty streets out through the Burg Thor,
along the leafless avenue in a cold driving rain, to the cemetery,
where the funeral march sounded behind half-bare
shrubbery on the edge of the little grove, and the great sandstone
cross marked the Buddenbrook family lot. The stone
lid of the grave, carven with the family arms, lay close to the
black hole framed in dripping greens.</p>

<p>A place had been prepared down below for the new-comer.
In the last few days, the Senator had supervised the work of
pushing aside the remains of a few early Buddenbrooks. The
music sounded, the coffin swayed on the ropes above the open
depth of masonry; with a gentle commotion it glided down.
Pastor Pringsheim, who had put on pulse-warmers, began to
speak afresh, his voice ringing fervid and emotional above the
open grave. He bent over the grave and spoke to the dead,
calling her by her full name, and blessed her with the sign of
the cross. His voice ceased; all the gentlemen held their top-hats
in front of their faces with their black-gloved hands; and
the sun came out a little. It had stopped raining, and into the
sound of the single drops that fell from the trees and bushes
there broke now and then the short, fine, questioning twitter
of a bird.</p>

<p>All the gentlemen turned a moment to press the hands of
the sons and brother of the dead once more.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook, as the others filed by, stood between
his brother Christian and his uncle Justus. His thick dark
woollen overcoat was dewed with fine silver drops. He had
begun of late to grow a little stout, the single sign of age in
his carefully preserved exterior, and his cheeks, behind the
pointed protruding ends of his moustaches, looked rounder
than they used; but it was a pale and sallow roundness, without
blood or life. He held each man’s hand a moment in his
own, and his slightly reddened eyes looked them all, with
weary politeness, in the face.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">A week</span> later there sat in Senator Buddenbrook’s private
office, in the leather chair beside the writing-desk, a little
smooth-shaven old man with snow-white hair falling over his
brow and temples. He sat in a crouching position, supporting
both hands on the white top of his crutch-cane, and his
pointed chin on his hands; while he directed at the Senator a
look of such malevolence, such a crafty, penetrating glance,
that one wondered why the latter did not avoid contact with
such a man as this. But the Senator sat apparently at ease,
leaning back in his chair, talking to this baleful apparition
as to a harmless ordinary citizen. Broker Siegismund Gosch
and the head of the firm of Johann Buddenbrook were discussing
the price of the Meng Street house.</p>

<p>It took a long time. The offer of twenty-eight thousand
thaler made by Herr Gosch seemed too low to the Senator, and
the broker called heaven to witness that it would be an act of
madness to add a single groschen to the sum. Thomas
Buddenbrook spoke of the central position and unusual extent
of the property; but Herr Gosch, with picturesque gestures,
in low and sibilant tones, expatiated upon the criminal risk
he would be running. He waxed almost poetic. Ha! Could
his honoured friend tell him when, to whom, for how much,
he would be able to get rid of the house again? How often,
in the course of the century, would there be a demand for
such a house? Perhaps his friend and patron could assure
him that to-morrow, on the train from Buchen, there was
arriving an Indian nabob who wished to establish himself in
the Buddenbrook mansion? He, Siegismund Gosch, would
have it on his hands, simply on his hands, and it would be the
ruin of him. He would be a beaten man, his race would be
run, his grave dug—yes, it would be dug—and, as the phrase
enchanted him, he repeated it, and added something more
about chattering apes and clods of earth falling upon the lid
of his coffin.</p>

<p>But the Senator was not satisfied. He spoke of the ease
with which the property could be divided, emphasized his
responsibility toward his sister, and remained by the sum of
thirty thousand thaler. After which he had to listen, with
a mixture of enjoyment and impatience, to a rejoinder from
Herr Gosch, which lasted some two hours, during which the
broker sounded, as it were, all the registers of his character.
He played two rôles at once: first, the hypocritical villain,
with a sweet voice, his head on one side, and a smile of open-hearted
simplicity. Stretching out his large, white hand, with
the long, trembling fingers, he said “Agree, my dear young
patron: eighty-four thousand marks—it is the offer of an honest
old man.” But a child could have seen that this was all
lies and treachery—a deceiving mask, behind which the man’s
deep villainy peeped forth.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook finally declared that he must take
time to think, and that in any case he must consult his sister,
before he accepted the twenty-eight thousand thaler—which
was unlikely. Then he turned the conversation to indifferent
topics and asked Herr Gosch about business and his health.</p>

<p>Things were going badly with Herr Gosch. He made a fine,
sweeping gesture to wave away the imputation that he was a
prosperous man. The burdens of old age approached, they
were at hand even now; as aforesaid, his grave was dug. He
could not even carry his glass of grog to his lips without spilling
half of it, his arm trembled so like the devil. It did no
good to curse. The will no longer availed. And yet—! He
had his life behind him—not such a poor life, after all. He
had looked at the world with his eyes open. Revolutions had
thundered by, their waves had beat upon his heart—so to
speak. Ha! Those were other times, when he had stood at
the side of Consul Johann Buddenbrook, the Senator’s father,
at that historic sitting, and defied the fury of the raging mob.
A frightful experience! No, his life had not been poor,
either outwardly or inwardly. Hang it—he had been conscious
of powers—and as the power is, so is the ideal—as
Feuerbach says. And even now—even now, his soul was not
impoverished, his heart was still young: it had never ceased,
and would never cease, to be capable of great emotions, to
live fervently in and for his ideals. They would go with
him to his grave.—But were ideals, after all, meant to be
realized? No, a thousand times no! We might long for the
stars, but should we ever reach them? No, hope, not
realization, was the most beautiful thing in life: “L’espérance,
tout trompeuse qu’elle est, sert au moins à nous
mener à la fin de la vie par un chemin agréable.” La Rochefoucauld
said that, and it was fine, wasn’t it? Oh, yes, his
honoured friend and patron, of course, did not need to
console himself with that sort of thing. The waves of life
had lifted him high on their shoulders, and fortune played
about his brow. But for the lonely and submerged, who
dreamed alone in the darkness—</p>

<p>Suddenly—“<i>You</i> are happy,” he said, laying his hand on
the Senator’s knee, and looking up at him with swimming
eyes. “Don’t deny it—it would be sacrilege. You are
happy. You hold fortune in your arms. You have reached
out your strong arms and conquered her—your strong hands,”
he corrected himself, not liking the sound of “arms” twice
so close together. He was silent, and the Senator’s deprecating,
patient reply went unheard. He seemed to be darkly
dreaming for a moment; then he got up.</p>

<p>“We have been chatting,” he said, “but we came together
on business. Time is money. Let us not waste it in
hesitation. Listen to me. Since it is you: since it is you,
you understand—” here it almost looked as though Herr
Gosch was about to give way again to another rhapsody;
but he restrained himself. He made a wide, sweeping
gesture, and cried: “Twenty-nine thousand thaler, eighty-seven
thousand marks current, for your mother’s house! Is
it a bargain?” And Senator Buddenbrook agreed.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder, of course, found the sum ridiculously
small. Considering the memories that clung about it, she
would have thought a million down no more than an honest
price for their old home. But she rapidly adjusted herself—the
more readily that her thoughts and efforts were soon
taken up by plans for the future.</p>

<p>She rejoiced from the bottom of her heart over all the
good furniture that had fallen to her share. And though
there was no idea of bustling her away from under the
parental roof, she plunged at once, with the greatest zest,
into the business of finding and renting a new home. The
leave-taking would be hard—the very thought of it brought
tears to her eyes. But the prospect of a change was not
without its own charm too. It was almost like another
setting-out—the fourth one! And so again she looked at
houses and visited Jacob’s; again she bargained for portières
and stair-carpets. And while she did all that, her heart beat
faster—yes, even the heart of this old woman who was
steeled by the misfortunes of life!</p>

<p>Weeks passed like this: four, five, six weeks. The first
snow fell, the stoves crackled. Winter was here again; and
the Buddenbrooks began to consider sadly what sort of
Christmas feast they should have this year. But now something
happened: something surprising and dramatic beyond
all words, something that simply knocked you off your feet.
Frau Permaneder paused in the midst of her business, like one
paralyzed.</p>

<p>“Thomas,” she said, “am I crazy? Is Gosch dreaming?
It is too absurd, too outlandish—” She held her temples
with both her hands. The Senator shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>“My dear child, nothing at all is decided yet. But there
is the possibility—and if you think it over quietly, you will
see that there is nothing so extraordinary about it, after all.
It is a little startling, I admit. It gave me a start
when Gosch first told me. But absurd? What makes it
absurd?”</p>

<p>“I should die,” said she. She sat down in a chair and
stopped there without moving.</p>

<p>What was going on? Simply that a buyer had appeared
for the house; or, rather, a possible purchaser showed a
desire to go over it, with a view to negotiations. And this
possible purchaser was—Hermann Hagenström, wholesale
dealer and Consul for the Kingdom of Portugal.</p>

<p>When the first rumour reached Frau Permaneder, she was
stunned, incredulous, incapable of grasping the idea. But
when the rumour became concrete, when it actually took
shape in the person of Consul Hermann Hagenström, standing,
as it were, before the door, then she pulled herself
together, and animation came back to her.</p>

<p>“This must not happen, Thomas. As long as I live, it
must not happen. When one sells one’s house, one is bound
to look out for the sort of master it gets. Our Mother’s
house! Our house! The landscape-room!”</p>

<p>“But what stands in the way?”</p>

<p>“What stands in the way? Heavens, Thomas! Mountains
stand in the way—or they ought to! But he doesn’t see them,
this fat man with the snub nose! He doesn’t care about them.
He has no delicacy and no feeling—he is like the beasts that
perish. From time immemorial the Hagenströms and we
have been rivals. Old Heinrich played Father and Grandfather
some dirty tricks; and if Hermann hasn’t tripped you
up yet, it is only because he hasn’t had a chance. When we
were children, I boxed his ears in the open street, for very
good reasons; and his precious little sister Julchen nearly
scratched me to pieces for it. That was all childishness,
then. But they have always looked on and enjoyed it whenever
we had a piece of bad luck—and it was mostly I myself
who gave them the pleasure. God willed it so. Whatever
the Consul did to injure you or overreach you in a business
way, that I can’t speak of, Tom. You must know better than
I. But the last straw was when Erica made a good marriage
and he wormed around and wormed around until he managed
to spoil it and get her husband shut up, through his brother,
who is a cat! And now they have the nerve—”</p>

<p>“Listen, Tony. In the first place, we have nothing more
to say in the matter. We made our bargain with Gosch, and
he has the right to deal with whomever he likes. But there
is a sort of irony about it, after all—”</p>

<p>“Irony? Well, if you like to call it that—but what I
call it is a disgrace, a slap in the face; because that is just
what it would be. You don’t realize what it would be like,
in the least. But it would mean to everybody that the
Buddenbrook family are finished and done for: they clear out,
and the Hagenströms squeeze into their place, rattlety-bang!
No, Thomas, never will I consent to sit by while this
goes on. I will never stir a finger in such baseness. Let
him come here if he dares. I won’t receive him, you may be
sure of that. I will sit in my room with my daughter and my
granddaughter, and turn the key in the door, and forbid him
to enter.—That is just what I will do.”</p>

<p>“I know, Tony, you will do what you think best; and you
will probably consider well beforehand if it will be wise not
to preserve the ordinary social forms. For of course you
don’t imagine that Consul Hagenström would feel wounded
by your conduct? Not in the least, my child. It would
neither please nor displease him—he would simply be mildly
surprised, that is all. The trouble is, you imagine he has the
same feelings toward you that you have toward him. That is
a mistake, Tony. He does not hate us in the least. He
doesn’t hate anybody. He is highly successful and extremely
good-natured. As I’ve told you more than ten times already,
he would speak to you on the street with the utmost cordiality
if you didn’t put on such a belligerent air. I’m sure he is
surprised at it—for two minutes; of course not enough to
upset the equilibrium of a man to whom nobody can do any
harm. What is it you reproach him with? Suppose he has
outstripped me in business, and even now and then got ahead
of me in some public affair? That only means he is a better
business man and a cleverer politician than I am.—There’s no
reason at all for you to laugh in that scornful way.—But to
come back to the house. The truth is, it has lost most of its
old significance for us—that has gradually passed over to mine.
I say this to console you in advance; on the other hand, it is
plain why Consul Hagenström is thinking of buying. These
people have come up in the world, their family is growing,
they have married into the Möllendorpf family, and become
equal to the best in money and position. But so far, there
has been something lacking, the outward sign of their position,
which they were evidently willing to do without: the historic
consecration—the legitimization, so to speak. But now they
seem to have made up their minds to have that too; and some
of it they will get by moving into a house like this one. You
wait and see: mark my words, the Consul will preserve everything
as much as possible as it is, he will even keep the ‘Dominus
providebit’ over the door—though, to do him justice, it
hasn’t been the Lord at all, but Hermann Hagenström himself,
single-handed, that has put the family and the firm where
they are!”</p>

<p>“Bravo, Tom! Oh, it does do me good to hear you say
something spiteful about them once in a while! That’s
really all I want! Oh, if I only had your head! Wouldn’t I
just give it to him! But there you stand—”</p>

<p>“You see, my head doesn’t really do me much good.”</p>

<p>“There you stand, I say, with that awful calmness, which I
simply don’t understand at all, and tell me how Hermann
Hagenström does things. Ah, you may talk as you like, but
you have a heart in your body, the same as I have myself, and
I simply don’t believe you feel as calm inside as you make
out. All the things you say are nothing but your own efforts
to console yourself.”</p>

<p>“Now, Tony, you are getting pert. What I <i>do</i> is all you
have anything to do with—what I think is my own affair.”</p>

<p>“Tell me one thing, Tom: wouldn’t it be like a nightmare
to you?”</p>

<p>“Exactly.”</p>

<p>“Like something you dreamed in a fever?”</p>

<p>“Why not?”</p>

<p>“Like the most ridiculous kind of farce?”</p>

<p>“There, there, now, that’s enough!”</p>

<p>And Consul Hagenström appeared in Meng Street, accompanied
by Herr Gosch, who held his Jesuit hat in his hand,
crouched over like a conspirator, and peered past the maid
into the landscape-room even while he handed her his card.</p>

<p>Hermann Hagenström looked the City man to the life: an
imposing Stock Exchange figure, in a coat the fur of which
seemed a foot long, standing open over an English winter
suit of good fuzzy yellow-green tweed. He was so uncommonly
fat that not only his chin, but the whole lower part of
his face, was double—a fact which his full short-trimmed
blond beard could not disguise. When he moved his forehead
or eyebrows, deep folds came even in the smoothly shorn
skin of his skull. His nose lay flatter upon his upper lip
than ever, and breathed down into his moustaches. Now and
then his mouth had to come to the rescue and fly open for a
deep breath. When it did this it always made a little smacking
noise, as the tongue came away from the roof of his
mouth.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder coloured when she heard this once well-known
sound. A vision of lemon-buns with truffled sausage
on top, almost threatened, for a moment, the stony dignity of
her bearing. She sat on the sofa, her arms crossed and her
shoulders lifted, in an exquisitely fitting black gown with
flounces up to the waist, and a dainty mourning cap on her
smooth hair. As the two gentlemen entered, she made a remark
to her brother the Senator, in a calm, indifferent tone.
He had not had the heart to leave her in the lurch at this hour;
and he now walked to the middle of the room to meet their
guests, while Tony remained on the sofa. He exchanged a
hearty greeting with Herr Gosch and a correct and courteous
one with the Consul; then Tony rose of her own accord, performed
a measured bow to both of them at once, and, without
any excess of zeal, associated herself with her brother’s invitation
to the two gentlemen to be seated.</p>

<p>They all sat down, and the Consul and the broker talked
by turns for the next few minutes. Herr Gosch’s voice was
offensively obsequious as he begged them to pardon the intrusion
on their privacy—you could hear a malign undercurrent
in it none the less—but Herr Consul Hagenström was
anxious to go through the house with a view to possible purchase.
And the Consul, in a voice that again called up visions
of lemon-bun and goose-liver, said the same thing in different
words. Yes, in fact, this was the idea he had in mind and
hoped to be able to carry out—provided the broker did not
try to drive too hard a bargain with him, ha, ha! He did not
doubt but the matter could be settled to the satisfaction of
everybody concerned.</p>

<p>His manner was free and easy and like a man of the world’s,
which did not fail to make a certain impression on Madame
Permaneder; the more so that he nearly always turned to her
as he spoke. His tone was almost apologetic when he went
into detail upon the grounds for his desire to purchase.
“Room!” he said. “We need more room. My house in
Sand Street—you wouldn’t believe it, my dear madam, nor
you, Herr Senator, but in fact, it is getting so small we can’t
turn round in it. I’m not speaking of company. It only
takes the family, and the Huneus, and the Möllendorpfs and
my brother Moritz’s family, and there we are—in fact,
packed in like sardines. So, then—well, why should we, you
know!”</p>

<p>He spoke in an almost fretful tone, while manner and
gestures expressed: “You see for yourselves, there’s no
reason why I should put up with that sort of thing, when
there is plenty of money to do what we like!”</p>

<p>“I thought of waiting,” he went on, “till Zerline and Bob
should want a house. Then they could take mine, and I
could find something larger for myself. But in fact—you
know,” he interrupted himself, “my daughter Zerline has
been engaged to Bob, my brother the attorney’s eldest, for
years. The wedding won’t be put off much longer—two years
at most. They are young—so much the better. Well—in
fact—why should I wait for them and let slip a
good chance when it offers? There would be no sense in
that.”</p>

<p>Everybody agreed. The conversation paused for a while
on the subject of the approaching wedding. Marriages—advantageous
marriages—between first cousins were not
uncommon in the town, and this one excited no disapproval.
The plans of the young pair were inquired into—with
reference to the wedding journey. They thought of going
to the Riviera, to Nice and so on. That was what they
seemed to want to do—and why shouldn’t they, you know?
The younger children were mentioned, and the Consul spoke
of them with easy satisfaction, shrugging his shoulders. He
himself had five children, and his brother Moritz had four
sons and daughters. Yes, they were all flourishing, thanks.
Why shouldn’t they be,—you know? In fact, they were all
very well. And he came back to the growing up of the
family, and to their narrow quarters. “Yes, this is something
else entirely,” he said. “I’ve seen that already, on the
way upstairs. This house is a pearl, certainly a pearl—if
you can compare anything so large with anything so
small, ha, ha! Why, even the hangings here—I own up
to having had my eye on the hangings all the time I’ve been
talking. A most charming room—in fact. When I think
that you have passed all your life in these surroundings—in
fact—”</p>

<p>“With some interruptions,” said Frau Permaneder, in that
extraordinarily throaty voice of which she sometimes availed
herself.</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, interruptions,” repeated the Consul, with a civil
smile. Then he glanced at Senator Buddenbrook and the
broker; and, as those gentlemen were in conversation together,
he drew up his chair to Frau Permaneder’s sofa and
leaned toward her, so that she felt his heavy breathing close
under her nose. Being too polite to turn away, she sat as
stiff and erect as possible and looked down at him under her
drooping lids. But he was quite unconscious of her discomfort.</p>

<p>“Let me see, my dear Madame Permaneder,” he said.
“Seems to me we’ve done business together before now. In
fact—what was it we were dickering over then? Sweetmeats,
wasn’t it, or tit-bits of some sort—and now a whole house!”</p>

<p>“I don’t remember,” said Frau Permaneder. She held her
neck as stiff as she could, for his face was really disgustingly,
indecently near.</p>

<p>“You don’t remember?”</p>

<p>“No, really, I don’t remember anything at all about
sweetmeats. I have a sort of hazy recollection of lemon-buns,
with sausage on top—some disgusting sort of school
luncheon—I don’t know whether it was yours or mine. We
were all children then.—But this matter of the house is
entirely Herr Gosch’s affair. I have nothing to do with it.”</p>

<p>She gave her brother a quick, grateful look, for he had
seen her need and come to her rescue by asking if the gentlemen
were ready to make the round of the house. They were
quite ready, and took temporary leave of Frau Permaneder,
expressing the hope of seeing her again when they had
finished. The Senator led the two gentlemen out through the
dining-room.</p>

<p>He took them upstairs and down, and showed them the
rooms in the second storey as well as those on the corridor
of the first, and the ground floor, including the kitchen and
cellars. As the visit fell in business hours, they refrained
from visiting the offices of the Insurance Company. But the
new Director was mentioned, and Consul Hagenström
declared him to be a very honest chap—a remark which was
received by the Senator in silence.</p>

<p>They went through the garden, lying bare and wretched
under half-melting snow, looked at the Portal, and returned
to the laundry, in the front courtyard; and thence by the
narrow paved walk that led between walls to the back courtyard
with the oak-tree, and the “back-building.” Here there
was nothing but old age, neglect, and dilapidation. Grass
and moss grew between the paving-stones, the steps were in
a state of advanced decay, and they could only look into the
billiard-room without entering,—the floor was so bad—so
the family of cats that lived there rent-free was not
disturbed.</p>

<p>Consul Hagenström said very little—he was obviously
planning. “Well, yes,” he kept saying, as he looked and
turned away, suggesting by his manner that in case he bought
the house all this would of course be different. He stood,
with the same air, on the ground floor of the back building
and looked up at the empty attic. “Yes, well,” he repeated,
and set in motion the thick, rotting cable with a rusty iron
hook on the end that had been hanging there for years. Then
he turned on his heel.</p>

<p>“Best thanks for your trouble, Herr Senator,” he said.
“We’re at the end, I suppose.” He scarcely uttered a word
on the rapid return to the front building, or later when the
two gentlemen paid their respects to Frau Permaneder in the
landscape-room and the Senator accompanied them down the
steps and across the entry. But hardly had they said good-bye
and Consul Hagenström turned with his companion to
walk down the street, when it was seen that a very lively conversation
began at once between the two.</p>

<p>The Senator returned to the room where Frau Permaneder,
with her severest manner, sat bolt upright in the window,
knitting with two huge wooden needles a black worsted frock
for her granddaughter Elisabeth, and now and then casting
a glance into the gossip’s glass. Thomas walked up and
down a while in silence, with his hands in his trousers
pockets.</p>

<p>“Yes, we have put it in the broker’s hands,” he said
at length. “We must wait and see what comes of it. My
opinion is that he will buy the whole property, live here in
the front, and utilize the back part in some other way.”</p>

<p>She did not look at him, or change her position, or cease
to knit. On the contrary, the needles flew back and forth
faster than ever.</p>

<p>“Oh, certainly—of course he’ll buy it. He’ll buy the
whole thing,” she said, and it was her throaty voice she
used. “Why shouldn’t he buy it—you know? In fact, there
would be no sense in that at all!”</p>

<p>She raised her eyebrows and looked severely through her
pince-nez—which she now used for sewing, but never
managed to put on straight—at her knitting-needles. They
flew like lightning round and round each other, clacking all
the while.</p>

<hr class="tb">

<p>Christmas came: the first Christmas without the Frau
Consul. They spent the evening of the twenty-fourth at the
Senator’s house, without the old Krögers and without the
Misses Buddenbrook; for the old children’s day had now
ceased to exist, and Thomas Buddenbrook did not feel like
making presents to everybody who used to attend the Frau
Consul’s celebration. Only Frau Permaneder and Erica, with
little Elisabeth, Christian, Clothilde, and Mademoiselle
Weichbrodt, were invited. The latter insisted on holding the
customary present-giving on the twenty-fifth, in her own
stuffy little rooms, where it was attended with the usual
mishap.</p>

<p>There was no troop of poor retainers to receive shoes and
woollen underwear, and there were no choir-boys, when they
assembled in Fishers’ Lane on the twenty-fourth. They
joined quite simply together in “Holy Night,” and Therese
Weichbrodt read the Christmas chapter instead of the Frau
Senator, who did not particularly care for such things. Then
they went through the suite of rooms into the hall, singing in a
subdued way the first stanza of “O Evergreen.”</p>

<p>There was no special ground for rejoicing. Nobody’s face
was beaming with joy, there was no lively conversation.
What was there to talk about? They thought of the departed
mother, discussed the sale of the house and the well-lighted
apartment which Frau Permaneder had rented in a pleasant
house outside Holsten Gate, with a view on the green
square of Linden Place, and what would happen when Hugo
Weinschenk came out of prison. At intervals little Johann
played on the piano something which he had been learning
with Herr Pfühl, or accompanied his mother, not faultlessly,
but with a lovely singing tone, in a Mozart sonata. He was
praised and kissed, but had to be taken off to bed by Ida
Jungmann, for he was pale and tired on account of a recent
stomach upset.</p>

<p>Even Christian was disinclined to talk or joke. After
the violent altercation in the breakfast-room he had not let
fall another syllable about getting married. He lived on in
the old way, on terms with his brother which were not very
honourable to himself. He made a brief effort, rolling his
eyes about, to awaken sympathy in the company for the misery
in his side; went early to the club; and came back to supper,
which was held after the prescribed traditions. And then
the Buddenbrooks had this Christmas too behind them, and
were glad of it.</p>

<p>In the beginning of the year 1872, the household of the
deceased Frau Consul was broken up. The servants went, and
Frau Permaneder thanked God to see the last of Mamsell
Severin, who had continued to question her authority in the
most unpleasant manner, and now departed with the silk
gowns and linen which she had accumulated. Furniture
wagons stood before the door, and the old house was emptied
of its contents. The great carved chest, the gilt candelabra,
and the other things that had fallen to his share, the Senator
took to his house in Fishers’ Lane; Christian moved with his
into a three-room bachelor apartment near the club; and the
little Permaneder-Weinschenk family took possession with
theirs of the well-lighted flat in Linden Place, which was after
all not without some claims to elegance. It was a pretty
little apartment, and the front door of it had a bright copper
plate with the name A. Permaneder-Buddenbrook, Widow, in
ornamental lettering.</p>

<p>The house in Meng Street was hardly emptied when a
host of workmen appeared and began to tear down the back-building;
the dust from the old mortar darkened the air.
The property had passed into the hands of Consul Hermann
Hagenström. He had set his heart upon it, and had outbid
an offer which Sigmund Gosch received for it from Bremen.
He immediately began to turn it to the best advantage, in the
ingenious way for which he had been so long admired. In
the spring he moved with his family into the front house,
where he left everything almost untouched, save for the
necessary renovations and certain very modern improvements.
For instance, he had the old bell-pulls taken out and the
house fitted throughout with electric bells. And hardly had
the back-building been demolished when a new, neat, and airy
structure rose in its place, which fronted on Bakers’ Alley and
was intended for shops and warehouses.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder had frequently sworn to her brother that
no power on earth could bring her ever to look at the
parental home again. But it was hardly possible to carry out
this threat. Her way sometimes led her of necessity past
the shops which had been quickly and advantageously rented,
and past the show-windows of the back-building, or the
dignified gable front on the other side, where now, beneath
the “Dominus Providebit,” was to be read the name of Consul
Hermann Hagenström. When she saw that, Frau Permaneder,
on the open street, before ever so many people, simply began
to weep aloud. She put back her head like a bird beginning to
sing, pressed her handkerchief to her eyes, uttered a wail of
mingled protest and lament, and, giving no heed to the passers-by
or to the remonstrances of her daughter, gave her tears
free vent.</p>

<p>They were the unashamed, refreshing tears of her childhood,
which she still retained despite all the storms and
shipwrecks of her life.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h2 class="nobreak">PART TEN</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Often</span>, in an hour of depression, Thomas Buddenbrook
asked himself what he was, or what there was about him to
make him think even a little better of himself than he did
of his honest, limited, provincial fellow-burghers. The
imaginative grasp, the brave idealism of his youth was
gone. To work at his play, to play at his work, to bend an
ambition that was half-earnest, half-whimsical, toward the
accomplishment of aims that even to himself possessed but a
symbolic value—for such blithe scepticism and such an
enlightened spirit of compromise, a great deal of vitality is
necessary, as well as a sense of humour. And Thomas
Buddenbrook felt inexpressibly weary and disgusted.</p>

<p>What there was in life for him to reach, he had reached.
He was well aware that the high-water mark of his life—if
that were a possible way to speak of such a commonplace,
humdrum sort of existence—had long since passed.</p>

<p>As for money matters, his estate was much reduced and
the business, in general, on the decline. Counting his
mother’s inheritance and his share of the Meng Street
property, he was still worth more than six hundred thousand
marks. But the working capital of the firm had lain fallow
for years, under the pennywise policies of which the
Senator had complained at the time of the affair of the
Pöppenrade harvest. Since the blow he had then received,
they had grown worse instead of better; until now, at a time
when prospects were brighter than ever—when everybody was
flushed with victory, the city had at last joined the Customs
Union, and small retail firms all over the country were growing
within a few years into large wholesale ones—the firm of
Johann Buddenbrook rested on its oars and reaped no advantage
from the favourable time. If the head of the firm
were asked after his business, he would answer, with a
deprecating wave of the hand, “Oh, it’s not much good, these
days.” As a lively rival, a close friend of the Hagenströms,
once put it, Thomas Buddenbrook’s function on ’Change
was now largely decorative! The jest had for its point a
jeer at the Senator’s carefully preserved and faultless exterior—and
it was received as a masterpiece of wit by his fellow-citizens.</p>

<p>Thus the Senator’s services to the old firm were no longer
what they had been in the time of his strength and enthusiasm;
while his labours for the good of the community had at the
same time reached a point where they were circumscribed by
limitations from without. When he was elected to the
Senate, in fact, he had reached those limitations. There were
thereafter only places to keep, offices to hold, but nothing
further that he could achieve: nothing but the present, the
narrow reality; never any grandiose plans to be carried out
in the future. He had, indeed, known how to make his
position and his power mean more than others had made them
mean in his place: even his enemies did not deny that
he was “the Burgomaster’s right hand.” But Burgomaster
himself Thomas Buddenbrook could never become. He was
a merchant, not a professional man; he had not taken the
classical course at the gymnasium, he was not a lawyer. He
had always done a great deal of historical and literary reading
in his spare time, and he was conscious of being superior
to his circle in mind and understanding, in inward as well as
outward culture; so he did not waste much time in lamenting
the lack of external qualifications which made it impossible
for him to succeed to the first place in his little community.
“How foolish we were,” he said to Stephan Kistenmaker—but
he really only meant himself by “we”—“that we went
into the office so young, and did not finish our schooling
instead.” And Stephan Kistenmaker answered: “You’re
right there. But how do you mean?”</p>

<p>The Senator now chiefly worked alone at the great
mahogany writing-desk in his private office. No one could
see him there when he leaned his head on his hand and
brooded, with his eyes closed. But he preferred it, also,
because the hair-splitting pedantries of Herr Marcus had
become unendurable to him. The way the man for ever
straightened his writing-materials and stroked his beard
would in itself have driven Thomas Buddenbrook from his
seat in the counting-room. The fussiness of the old man
had increased with the years to a positive mania; but what
made it intolerable to the Senator was the fact that of late he
had begun to notice something of the same sort in himself.
He, who had once so hated all smallness and pettiness, was
developing a pedantry which seemed to him the outgrowth of
anybody else’s character rather than his own.</p>

<p>He was empty within. There was no stimulus, no absorbing
task into which he could throw himself. But his nervous
activity, his inability to be quiet, which was something
entirely different from his father’s natural and permanent
fondness for work, had not lessened, but increased—it had
indeed taken the upper hand and become his master. It was
something artificial, a pressure on the nerves, a depressant,
in fact, like the pungent little Russian cigarettes which he
was perpetually smoking. This craving for activity had
become a martyrdom; but it was dissipated in a host of
trivialities. He was harassed by a thousand trifles, most of
which had actually to do with the upkeep of his house and
his wardrobe; small matters which he could not keep in his
head, over which he procrastinated out of disgust, and upon
which he spent an utterly disproportionate amount of time
and thought.</p>

<p>What outsiders called his vanity had lately increased in a
way of which he was himself ashamed, though he was without
the power to shake off the habits he had formed. Nowadays
it was nine o’clock before he appeared to Herr Wenzel,
in his nightshirt, after hours of heavy, unrefreshing sleep;
and quite an hour and a half later before he felt himself
ready and panoplied to begin the day, and could descend
to drink his tea in the first storey. His toilette was a ritual
consisting of a succession of countless details which drove
him half mad: from the cold douche in the bathroom to the
last brushing of the last speck of dust off his coat, and the
last pressure of the tongs on his moustache. But it would
have been impossible for him to leave his dressing-room with
the consciousness of having neglected a single one of these
details, for fear he might lose thereby his sense of immaculate
integrity—which, however, would be dissipated in the course
of the next hour and have to be renewed again.</p>

<p>He saved in everything, so far as he could—without
subjecting himself to gossip. But he did not save where his
clothes were concerned—he still had them made by the best
Hamburg tailor, and spared no expense in the care and replenishing
of his wardrobe. A spacious cabinet, like another
room, was built into the wall of his dressing-room; and
here, on long rows of hooks, on wooden hangers, were coats,
smoking jackets, frock-coats, evening clothes, clothes for all
occasions, all seasons, and all grades of formality; the carefully
creased trousers were arranged on chairs beneath. The
top of his chest of drawers was covered with combs, brushes,
and toilet preparations for hair and beard; while within it
was the supply of body linen of all possible kinds, which was
constantly changed, washed, worn out, and renewed.</p>

<p>He spent in this dressing-room not only the early hours of
each morning, but also a long time before every dinner,
every sitting of the Senate, every public appearance—in
short, before every occasion on which he had to show himself
among his fellow men—even before the daily dinner
with his wife, little Johann, and Ida Jungmann. And when
he left it, the fresh underwear on his body, the faultless elegance
of his clothing, the smell of the brilliantine on his
moustache, and the cool, astringent taste of the mouth-wash
he used—all this gave him a feeling of satisfaction and
adequacy, like that of an actor who has adjusted every detail
of his costume and make-up and now steps out upon the
stage. And, in truth, Thomas Buddenbrook’s existence was
no different from that of an actor—an actor whose whole life
has become one long production, which, but for a few brief
hours for relaxation, consumes him unceasingly. In the
absence of any ardent objective interest, his inward impoverishment
oppressed him almost without any relief, with a
constant, dull chagrin; while he stubbornly clung to the determination
to be worthily representative, to conceal his inward
decline, and to preserve “the <i>dehors</i>” whatever it cost
him. All this made of his life, his every word, his every
motion, a constant irritating pretence.</p>

<p>And this state of things showed itself by peculiar symptoms
and strange whims, which he observed with surprise and disgust.
People who have no rôle to perform before the public,
who do not conceive themselves as acting a part, but as standing
unobserved to watch the performance of others, like to
stand with the light at their backs. But Thomas Buddenbrook
could not endure the feeling of standing in the shadow while
the light streamed full upon the faces of those whom he
wished to impress. He wanted his audience, before whom he
was to act the rôle of a social light, a public orator, or a
representative business man, to stand before him in a confused
and shadowy mass while a blinding light played upon
his own face. Only this gave him a feeling of separation and
safety, an intoxicating sense of self-production, which was
the atmosphere in which he achieved success. It had come
to be the case that precisely this intoxication was the most
bearable condition he knew. When he stood up at table,
wine-glass in hand, to reply to a toast, with his charming
manner, easy gestures, and witty turns of phrase, which struck
unerringly home and released waves of merriment down the
length of the table, then he might feel, as well as seem, the
Thomas Buddenbrook of former days. It was much harder
to keep the mastery over himself when he was sitting idle.
For then his weariness and disgust rose up within him,
clouded his eyes, relaxed his bearing and his facial muscles.
At such times, he was possessed by one desire: to steal away,
to be alone, to lie in silence, with his head resting on a cool
pillow.</p>

<hr class="tb">

<p>Frau Permaneder had dined that evening in Fishers’ Lane.
She was the only guest, for her daughter, who was to have
gone, had visited her husband that afternoon in the prison,
and felt, as she usually did, exhausted and incapable of
further effort. So she had stayed at home.</p>

<p>Frau Antonie had spoken at table of the mental condition
of her son-in-law, which, it appeared, was very bad; and the
question arose whether one might not, with some hope of
success, petition the Senate for a pardon. After dinner the
three relatives sat in the living-room, at the round table
beneath the great gas-lamp. The Frau Senator bent her
lovely face over some embroidery, and the gas-light lit up
gleams in her dark hair; Frau Permaneder, with careful
fingers, fastened an enormous red satin bow on to a tiny
yellow basket, intended as a birthday present for a friend.
Her glasses were stuck absolutely awry and useless on her
nose. The Senator sat with his legs crossed, partly turned
away from the table, in a large upholstered easy-chair, reading
the paper; he drew in the smoke of his Russian cigarette
and let it out again in a light grey stream between his
moustaches.</p>

<p>It was a warm summer Sunday evening. The lofty window
was open, and the lifeless, rather damp air flowed into the
room. From where they sat at the table they could look
between the grey gables of intervening houses at the stars and
the slowly moving clouds. There was still light in Iwersen’s
little flower-shop across the way. Further on in the
quiet street a concertina was being played with a good many
false notes, probably by the son of Dankwart the driver.
But sometimes the street was noisy with a troop of sailors,
singing, smoking, arm in arm, going, no doubt, from one
doubtful waterside public-house to another still more doubtful
one, and obviously in a jovial mood. Their rough voices
and swinging tread would die off down a cross-street.</p>

<p>The Senator laid down his newspaper, put his glasses in
his waistcoat pocket, and rubbed his hand over his eyes and
forehead.</p>

<p>“Feeble—very feeble indeed, this paper,” he said. “I
always think when I read it of what Grandfather used to say
about a dish that had no particular taste or consistency:
it tastes as if you were hanging your tongue out of the
window. One, two, three, and you’ve finished with the whole
stupid thing.”</p>

<p>“You are certainly right about that, Tom,” said Frau
Permaneder, letting fall her work and looking at her brother
sidewise, past her glasses but not through them. “What is
there in it? I’ve always said, ever since I was a mere slip
of a girl, that this town paper is a wretched sheet! I read
it too, of course, for want of a better one; but it isn’t so very
thrilling to hear that wholesale dealer Consul So-and-so is
going to celebrate his silver wedding! We ought to read
other papers: the <i>Königsberg Gazette</i>, or the <i>Rhenish Gazette</i>;
then we’d—”</p>

<p>She interrupted herself. She had taken up the paper as
she spoke, and let her eye run contemptuously down the
columns. But her glance was arrested by a short notice of
four or five lines, which she read through, clutching her
eye-glasses, her mouth slowly opening. Then she uttered two
shrieks, with the palms of her hands pressed against her
cheeks, and her elbows held out straight.</p>

<p>“Oh, impossible—impossible! Imagine your not seeing
that at all. It is frightful! Oh, <i>poor</i> Armgard! It had to
come to her like that!”</p>

<p>Gerda had lifted her head from her work, and Thomas,
startled, looked at his sister. Much upset, Frau Permaneder
read the notice aloud, in a guttural, portentous tone. It
came from Rostock, and it said that, the night before, Herr
Ralf von Maiboom, owner of the Pöppenrade estate, had
committed suicide by shooting himself with a revolver, in the
study of the manor-house. “Pecuniary difficulties seem to
have been the cause of the act. Herr von Maiboom leaves
a wife and three children.” She finished and let the paper
fall in her lap, then leaned back and looked at her brother
and sister with wide, piteous eyes.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook had turned away while he listened,
and looked past his sister between the portières, into the dark
salon.</p>

<p>“With a revolver?” he asked, after silence had reigned
some two minutes. And then, after another pause, he said
in a low voice, slowly and mockingly: “That is the nobility
for you!”</p>

<p>Then he fell again to musing, and the rapidity with which
he drew the ends of his moustaches through his fingers
was in remarkable contrast to the vacant fixity of his gaze.
He did not listen to the lamentations of his sister, or to her
speculations on what poor Armgard would do now. Nor did
he notice that Gerda, without turning her head in his direction,
was fixing him with a searching and steady gaze from
her close-set, blue-shadowed eyes.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Thomas Buddenbrook</span> did not contemplate the future of
little Johann with the weary dejection which was now his
settled mood when he thought about his own life and his
own end. The family feeling which led him to cherish the
past history of his house extended itself even more strongly
into its future; and he was influenced, too, by the loving and
expectant curiosity concentrated upon his son by his family
and his friends and acquaintances, even by the Buddenbrook
ladies in Broad Street. He said to himself that, however
hopeless and thwarted he himself felt, he was still, wherever
his son was concerned, capable of inexhaustible streams of
energy, endurance, achievement, success—yes, that at this one
spot his chilled and artificial life could still be warmed into
a genuine and glowing warmth of hopes and fears and
affections.</p>

<p>Perhaps, some day, it would be granted to him to look back
upon his past from a quiet corner and watch the renascence
of the old time, the time of Hanno’s great-grandfather!
Was such a hope, after all, entirely vain? He had felt that
the music was his enemy; but it had almost begun to look
as if it had no such important bearing upon the situation.
Granted that the child’s fondness for improvising, without
notes, was evidence of a not quite common gift; in the
systematic lessons with Herr Pfühl he had not showed by any
means extraordinary progress. The preoccupation with music
was no doubt due to his mother’s influence; and it was not
surprising that during his early years this influence had been
preponderant. But the time was close at hand when it would
be the father’s turn to influence his son, to draw him over
to his side, to neutralize the feminine influence by introducing
a masculine one in its place. And the Senator determined
not to let any such opportunities pass without improving
them.</p>

<p>Hanno was now eleven years old. The preceding Easter,
he had, by the skin of his teeth and by dint of two extra examinations
in mathematics and geography, been passed into the
fourth form—as had likewise his young friend Count Mölln.
It had been settled that he should attend the mercantile side
of the school—for it went without saying that he would be a
merchant and take over the family business. When his father
asked him if he felt any inclination toward his future
career, he answered yes—a simple, unadorned, embarrassed
“yes,” which the Senator tried to make a little more convincing
by asking leading questions, but mostly without success.</p>

<p>If the Senator had had two sons, he would assuredly have
allowed the second to go through the gymnasium and study.
But the firm demanded a successor. And, besides, he was
convinced he was doing the boy a kindness in relieving him
of the unnecessary Greek. He was of opinion that the mercantile
course was the easier to master, and that Hanno would
therefore come through with greater credit and less strain if
he took it, considering his defects—his slowness of comprehension,
his absent, dreaming ways, and his physical delicacy,
which often obliged him to be absent from school. If little
Johann Buddenbrook were to achieve the position in life to
which he was called, they must be mindful before everything
else, by care and cherishing on the one hand, by sensible
toughening on the other, to strengthen his far from robust
constitution.</p>

<p>Hanno had grown sturdier in the past year; but, despite
his blue sailor suit, he still looked a little strange in the playground
of the school, by contrast with the blond Scandinavian
type that predominated there. He now wore his brown
hair parted on the side and brushed away from his white
forehead. But it still inclined to fall in soft ringlets over the
temples; and his eyes were as golden-brown as ever, and as
veiled with their brown lashes. His legs, in long black stockings,
and his arms, in the loose quilted blue sleeves of his suit,
were small and soft like a girl’s, and he had, like his mother,
the blue shadows under his eyes. And still, in those eyes,
especially when they gave a side glance, as they often did,
there was that timid and defensive look; while the mouth
closed with the old, woebegone expression which he had had
even as a baby, or went slightly crooked when he explored
the recesses of his mouth for a defective tooth. And there
would come upon his face when he did this a look as if he
were cold.</p>

<p>Dr. Langhals had now entirely taken over Dr. Grabow’s
practice and had become the Buddenbrook family physician.
From him they learned the reason why the child’s skin was
so pale and his strength so inadequate. It seemed that
Hanno’s organism did not produce red corpuscles in sufficient
number. But there was a remedy for this defect: cod-liver
oil, which, accordingly, Dr. Langhals prescribed in great
quantities: good, thick, greasy, yellow cod-liver oil, to be
taken from a porcelain spoon twice a day. The Senator gave
the order, and Ida Jungmann, with stern affection, saw it
carried out. In the beginning, to be sure, Hanno threw up
after each spoonful. His stomach seemed to have a prejudice
against the good cod-liver oil. But he got used to it in the
end—and if you held your breath and chewed a piece of rye
bread immediately after, the nausea was not so severe.</p>

<p>His other troubles were all consequent upon this lack of
red corpuscles, it appeared: secondary phenomena, Dr.
Langhals called them, looking at his fingernails. But it was
necessary to attack these other enemies ruthlessly. As for the
teeth, for these Herr Brecht and his Josephus lived in Mill
Street: to take care of them, to fill them; when necessary, to
extract them. And for the digestion there was castor-oil, thick,
clear castor-oil that slipped down your throat like a lizard,
after which you smelled and tasted it for three days, sleeping
and waking. Oh, why were all these remedies of such surpassing
nastiness? One single time—Hanno had been rather ill,
and his heart action had shown unusual irregularity—Dr.
Langhals had with some misgiving prescribed a remedy which
little Hanno had actually enjoyed, and which had done him a
world of good. These were arsenic pills. But however much
he asked to have the dose repeated—for he felt almost a
yearning for these sweet, soothing little pills—Dr. Langhals
never prescribed them again.</p>

<p>Castor-oil and cod-liver oil were excellent things. But
Dr. Langhals was quite at one with the Senator in the view
that they could not of themselves make a sound and sturdy
citizen of little Johann if he did not do his part. There
was gymnasium drill once a week in the summer, out on the
Castle Field, where the youth of the city were given the opportunity
to develop their strength and courage, their skill
and presence of mind, under the guidance of Herr Fritsche,
the drill-master. But to his father’s annoyance, Hanno
showed a distinct distaste for the manly sports—a silent,
pronounced, almost haughty opposition. Why was it that
he cared so little for playmates of his own class and age,
with whom he would have to live, and was for ever sticking
about with this little unwashed Kai, who was a good child,
of course, but not precisely a proper friend for the future?
Somehow or other a boy must know from the beginning how
to gain the confidence and respect of his comrades, upon
whose good opinion of him he will be dependent for the rest
of his life! There were, on the other hand, the two sons of
Consul Hagenström, two fine strapping boys, twelve and fourteen
years old, strong and full of spirits, who instituted prize-fights
in the neighbouring woods, were the best gymnasts in
the school, swam like otters, smoked cigars, and were ready
for any deviltry. They were popular, feared, and respected.
Their cousins, the two sons of Dr. Moritz Hagenström, the
State Attorney, were of a more delicate build, and gentler
ways. They distinguished themselves in scholarship, and were
model pupils: zealous, industrious, quiet, attentive, devoured
by the ambition to bring home a report card marked
“Number 1.” They achieved their ambition, and were respected
by their stupider and lazier colleagues. But—not to
speak of his masters—what must his fellow-pupils think of
Hanno, who was not only a very mediocre scholar, but a
weakling into the bargain; who tried to get out of everything
for which a scrap of courage, strength, skill, and energy were
needed? When Senator Buddenbrook passed the little
balcony on his way to his dressing-room, he would hear from
Hanno’s room, which was the middle one of the three on
that floor since he had grown too large to sleep with Ida
Jungmann, the notes of the harmonium, or the hushed and
mysterious voice of Kai, Count Mölln telling a story.</p>

<p>Kai avoided the drill classes, because he detested the
discipline which had to be observed there. “No, Hanno,”
he said, “I’m not going. Are you? Deuce take it! Anything
that would be any fun is forbidden.” Expressions like
“deuce take it” he got from his father. Hanno answered:
“If Herr Fritsche ever one single day smelled of anything
but beer and sweat, I might consider it. Don’t talk about
it, Kai. Go on. Tell that one about the ring you got out
of the bog—you didn’t finish it.” “Very good,” said Kai.
“But when I nod, then you must play.” And he went on with
his story.</p>

<p>If he was to be believed, he had once, on a warm evening,
in a strange, unrecognizable region, slid down a slippery,
immeasurable cliff, at the foot of which, by the flickering,
livid light from will-o’-the-wisps, he saw a black marsh, from
which silvery bubbles mounted with a hollow gurgling
sound. One of these bubbles, which kept coming up near
the bank, took the form of a ring when it burst; and
he had succeeded in seizing it, after long and dangerous
efforts—after which it burst no more, but remained in his
grasp, a firm and solid ring, which he put on his finger.
He rightly ascribed unusual powers to this ring; for by its
help he climbed up the slippery cliff and saw, a little way
off in the rosy mist, a black castle. It was guarded to the
teeth, but he had forced an entrance, always by the help of
the ring, and performed miracles of rescue and deliverance.
All this Hanno accompanied with sweet chords on his harmonium.
Sometimes, if the difficulties were not too great,
these stories were acted in the marionette theatre, to musical
accompaniment. But Hanno attended the drill class only
on his father’s express command—and then Kai went too.</p>

<p>It was the same with the skating in the wintertime, and with
the bathing in summer at the wooden bathing establishment
of Herr Asmussen, down on the river. “Bathing and
swimming—let the boy have bathing and swimming—he must
bathe and swim,” Dr. Langhals had said. And the Senator
was entirely of the same opinion. But Hanno had a reason
for absenting himself from the bathing, as well as from the
skating and the drill class. The two sons of Consul Hagenström,
who took part in all such exercises with great skill
and credit, singled Hanno out at once. And though they
lived in his own grandmother’s house, that fact did not prevent
them from making his life miserable. They lost no
opportunity of tormenting him. At drill they pinched him
and derided him. They rolled him in the dirty snow at the
ice-rink; and in the water they came up to him with horrid
noises. Hanno did not try to escape. It would have been
useless anyhow. He stood, with his girlish arms, up to his
middle in the turbid water of the pool, which had large
patches of duck-weed growing on it, and awaited his tormentors
with a scowl—a dark look and twisted lips. They,
sure of their prey, came on with long splashing strides.
They had muscular arms, these two young Hagenströms, and
they clutched him round his body and ducked him—ducked
him a good long time, so that he swallowed rather a lot of
the dirty water and gasped for breath a long time after. One
single time he was a little avenged. One afternoon the two
Hagenströms were holding him down under the water, when
one of them suddenly gave a shriek of pain and fury and lifted
his plump leg, from which drops of blood were oozing.
Beside him rose the head of Kai, Count Mölln, who had
somehow got hold of the price of admission, swum up invisible
in the water, and bitten young Hagenström—bitten
with all his teeth into his leg, like a furious little
dog. His blue eyes flashed through the red-blond hair
that hung down wet all over his face. He paid richly for
the deed, did the little Count, and left the swimming-pool
much the worse for the encounter. But Consul Hagenström’s
son limped perceptibly when he went home.</p>

<p>Nourishing remedies and physical exercise were the basis
of the treatment calculated to turn Senator Buddenbrook’s
son into a strong and healthy lad. But no less painstakingly
did the Senator strive to influence his mind and give him
lively impressions of the practical world in which he was to
live.</p>

<p>He began gradually to introduce him into the sphere of
his future activities. He took him on business expeditions
down to the harbour and let him stand by on the quay while
he spoke to the dockers in a mixture of Danish and dialect
or gave orders to the men who with hollow, long-drawn cries
were hauling up the sacks to the granary floor. He took
him into dark little warehouse offices to confer with superintendents.
All this life of the harbours, ships, sheds, and
granaries, where it smelled of butter, fish, sea-water, tar, and
greasy iron, had been to Thomas Buddenbrook from childhood
up the most fascinating thing on earth. But his son
gave no spontaneous expression of his own enchantment with
the sight; and so the father was fain to arouse it in him.
“What are the names of the boats that ply to Copenhagen?
The <i>Naiad</i>, the <i>Halmstadt</i>, the <i>Friederike Överdieck</i>—why,
if you know those, my son, at least that’s something! You’ll
soon learn the others. Some of those people over there
hauling up the grain have the same name as you—they were
named after your grandfather, as you were. And their
children are often named after me—or Mamma. We give
them little presents every year.—Now this next granary—we
don’t stop at it; we go past and don’t talk to the men; it is a
rival business.”</p>

<p>“Should you like to come, Hanno?” he said another time.
“There is a ship of our line being launched to-day, and I
shall christen it. Do you want to go?” And Hanno signified
that he wanted to go. He went with his father, listened
to his speech, and saw him break a bottle of champagne on
the prow of the ship; saw how she glided down the ways,
which had been smeared with green soap, and into the
water.</p>

<p>On certain days of the year, as New Year’s and Palm
Sunday, when there were confirmations, Senator Buddenbrook
drove out on a round of visits to particular houses in
which he had social relations. His wife did not like these
visits, and excused herself on the ground of headache and
nervousness, so Hanno would be asked to go along in her
place; and here, too, he signified his desire to go. He climbed
into the carriage beside his father, and sat silent by his side
in the reception-rooms, watching his easy, tactful, assured,
and carefully graduated manner toward their hosts. He
heard District Commander Colonel Herr von Rinnlingen tell
his father how greatly he appreciated the honour of his
visit, and saw how his father, in reply, put on an air of
amiable depreciation and laid his arm an instant across the
Colonel’s shoulders. In another place the same remark was
made, and he received it with quiet seriousness, and in a
third with an ironically exaggerated compliment in return.
All this with a floridity of speech and gesture which he obviously
liked to produce for the admiration of his son, and
from which he promised himself the most edifying results.</p>

<p>But the little boy saw more than he should have seen;
the shy, gold-brown, blue-shadowy eyes observed too well.
He saw not only the unerring charm which his father exercised
upon everybody: he saw as well, with strange and
anguished penetration, how cruelly hard it was upon him.
He saw how his father, paler and more silent after each visit,
would lean back in his corner of the carriage with closed
eyes and reddened eyelids; he realized with a sort of horror
that on the threshold of the next house a mask would glide
over his face, a galvanized activity take hold of the weary
frame. Thus the visits, the social intercourse with one’s kind,
instead of giving little Johann, quite simply, the idea that
one has practical interests in common with one’s fellow men,
which one looks after oneself, expecting others to do the
same, appeared to him like an end in themselves; instead of
straightforward and single-minded participation in the
common business, he saw his father perform an artificial
and complicated part, by dint of a fearful effort and an
exaggerated, consuming virtuosity. And when he thought that
some day he should be expected to perform the same part,
under the gaze of the whole community, Hanno shut his eyes
and shivered with rebellion and disgust.</p>

<p>Ah, that was not the effect Thomas Buddenbrook looked
for from the influence of his own personality upon his
son’s! What he had hoped to do was to stimulate self-confidence
in the boy, and a sense of the practical side of
life. This was what he had in mind—and nothing else.</p>

<p>“You seem to enjoy good living, my boy,” said he, when
Hanno asked for a second portion of the sweet or a half-cup
of coffee after dinner. “Well, then, you must become a
merchant and earn a lot of money. Should you like to do
that?” Little Johann said he would.</p>

<p>Sometimes when the family were invited to dinner, Aunt
Antonie or Uncle Christian would begin to tease Aunt
Clothilde and imitate her meek, drawling accents. Then
little Johann, stimulated by the heavy red wine which they
gave him, would ape his elders and make some remarks to
Aunt Clothilde in the same vein. And then how Thomas
Buddenbrook would laugh! He would give a loud, hearty,
jovial roar, like a man put in high spirits by some unexpected
piece of good luck, and join in on his son’s side
against poor Aunt Clothilde, though for his own part he had
long since given up these witticisms at the expense of his
poor relative. It was so easy, so safe, to tease poor, limited,
modest, lean and hungry Clothilde, that, harmless though it
was, he felt it rather beneath him. But he wished he did not,
for it was the same story over again: too many considerations,
too many scruples. Why must he be for ever opposing these
scruples against the hard, practical affairs of life? Why
could he never learn that it was possible to grasp a situation,
to see around it, as it were, and still to turn it to one’s own advantage
without any feeling of shame? For precisely this, he
said to himself, is the essence of a capacity for practical
life!</p>

<p>And thus, how happy, how delighted, how hopeful he felt
whenever he saw even the least small sign in little Johann
of a capacity for practical life!</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> extended summer trip which had once been customary
with the Buddenbrooks had now been given up for some years.
Indeed, when the Frau Senator, in the previous spring, had
wished to make her old father in Amsterdam a visit and play
a few duets with him, the Senator had given his consent
rather curtly. But it had become the rule for Gerda, little
Johann, and Fräulein Jungmann to spend the holidays at the
Kurhouse, in Travemünde, for the sake of Hanno’s health.</p>

<p>Summer holidays at the seashore! Did anybody really
understand the joy of that? After the dragging monotony
and worry of the endless school terms came four weeks of
peaceful, care-free seclusion, full of the good smell of seaweed
and the whispering of the gentle surf. Four weeks!
At the beginning it seemed endless; you could not believe
that it would end; it was almost indelicate to suggest such
a thing! Little Johann could not comprehend the crudity of
a master who could say: “After the holidays we shall take
up our work at—” this or that point! After the holidays!
He appeared to be already rejoicing in the thought, this
strange man in the shiny worsted suit! After the holidays!
What a thought! And how far, far off in the grey distance
lay everything that was on the other side of the holidays,
on the other side of those four weeks!</p>

<p>The inspection of the school report, with its record of
examinations well or badly got through, would be at last over,
and the journey in the overcrowded carriage. Hanno would
wake the first morning in his room at the Kurhouse, in one
of the Swiss cottages that were united by a small gallery to
the main building and the pastry-shop. He would have a
vague feeling of happiness that mounted in his brain and
made his heart contract. He would open his eyes and look
with eager pleasure at the old-fashioned furniture of the
cleanly little room. A moment of dazed and sleepy bliss:
then he would be conscious that he was in Travemünde—for
four immeasurable weeks in Travemünde. He did not stir.
He lay on his back in the narrow yellow wooden bed, the
linen of which was extremely thin and soft with age. He
even shut his eyes again and felt his chest rising in deep,
slow breaths of happy anticipation.</p>

<p>The room lay in yellow daylight that came in through
the striped blind. Everything was still—Mamma and Ida
Jungmann were asleep. Nothing was to be heard but a
measured, peaceful sound which meant that the boy was
raking the gravelled paths of the Kurgarden below, and the
buzzing of a fly that had got between the blind and the
window and was storming the pane—you could see his shadow
shooting about in long zigzag lines. Peace! Only the sound
of the rake and the dull buzzing noise. This gently animated
quiet filled little Johann with a priceless sensation: the feeling
of quiet, well-cared-for, elegant repose which was the
atmosphere of the resort, and which he loved better than anything
else. Thank God, none of the shiny worsted-coats
who were the chosen representatives of grammar and the
rule of three on this earth was in the least likely to come
here—for here it was rather exclusive and expensive.</p>

<p>An access of joy made him spring up and run barefoot to
the window. He put up the blind and unfastened the white-painted
hook of the window; and as he opened it the fly
escaped and flew away over the flower-beds and the gravelled
paths. The music pavilion, standing in a half-circle of beech-trees
opposite the main building, was still empty and quiet.
The Leuchtenfield, which took its name from the lighthouse
that stood on it, somewhere off to the right, stretched its
extent of short sparse grass under the pale sky, to a point
where the grass passed into a growth of tall, coarse water-plants;
and then came the sand, with its rows of little wooden
huts and tall wicker beach-chairs looking out to the sea. It
lay there, the sea, in peaceful morning light, striped blue
and green; and a steamer came in from Copenhagen, between
the two red buoys that marked its course, and one did not
need to know whether it was the <i>Naiad</i> or the <i>Friederike
Överdieck</i>. Hanno Buddenbrook drew in a deep, quiet, blissful
breath of the spicy air from the sea and greeted her
tenderly, with a loving, speechless, grateful look.</p>

<p>Then the day began, the first of those paltry twenty-eight
days, which seemed in the beginning like an eternity of
bliss, and which flew by with such desperate haste after the
first two or three. They breakfasted on the balcony or
under the great chestnut tree near the children’s playground,
where the swing hung. Everything—the smell of the freshly
washed table-cloth when the waiter shook it out, the tissue
paper serviettes, the unaccustomed bread, the eggs they ate
out of little metal cups, with ordinary spoons instead of bone
ones like those at home—all this, and everything, enchanted
little Johann.</p>

<p>And all that followed was so easy and care-free—such a
wonderfully idle and protected life. There was the forenoon
on the beach, while the Kurhouse band gave its morning programme;
the lying and resting at the foot of the beach-chair,
the delicious, dreamy play with the soft sand that did not
make you dirty, while you let your eyes rove idly and lose
themselves in the green and blue infinity beyond. There
was the air that swept in from that infinity—strong, free,
wild, gently sighing and deliciously scented; it seemed to
enfold you round, to veil your hearing and make you
pleasantly giddy, and blessedly submerge all consciousness
of time and space. And the bathing here was a different
affair altogether from that in Herr Asmussen’s establishment.
There was no duck-weed here, and the light green water
foamed away in crystalline clearness when you stirred it up.
Instead of a slimy wooden floor there was soft sand to caress
the foot—and Consul Hagenström’s sons were far away, in
Norway or the Tyrol. The Consul loved to make an extended
journey in the holidays, and—why shouldn’t he?</p>

<p>A walk followed, to warm oneself up, along the beach to
Sea-gull Rock or Ocean Temple, a little lunch by the beach-chair;
then the time came to go up to one’s room for an hour’s
rest, before making a toilette for the table-d’hôte. The table-d’hôte
was very gay, for this was a good season at the baths,
and the great dining-room was filled with acquaintances of
the Buddenbrooks, Hamburg families, and even some Russians
and English people. A black-clad gentleman sat at a tiny
table and served the soup out of a silver tureen. There were
four courses, and the food tasted nicer and more seasoned
than that at home, and many people drank champagne.
These were the single gentlemen who did not allow their
business to keep them chained in town all the week, and who
got up some little games of roulette after dinner: Consul
Peter Döhlmann, who had left his daughter at home, and
told such extremely funny stories that the ladies from
Hamburg laughed till their sides ached and they begged him
for mercy; Senator Dr. Cremer, the old Superintendent of
Police; Uncle Christian, and his friend Dr. Gieseke, who was
also without his family, and paid everything for Uncle Christian.
After dinner, the grown-ups drank coffee under the awnings
of the pastry-shop, and the band played, and Hanno sat on
a chair close to the steps of the pavilion and listened unwearied.
He was settled for the afternoon. There was a shooting-gallery
in the Kurgarden, and at the right of the Swiss cottage were
the stables, with horses and donkeys, and the cows whose
foaming, fragrant milk one drank warm every evening. One
could go walking in the little town or along the front; one
could go out to the Prival in a boat and look for amber on
the beach, or play croquet in the children’s playground, or
listen to Ida Jungmann reading aloud, sitting on a bench
on the wooded hillside where hung the great bell for the
table-d’hôte. But best of all was it to go back to the beach
and sit in the twilight on the end of the breakwater, with your
face turned to the open horizon. Great ships passed by, and
you signalled them with your handkerchief; and you listened
to the little waves slapping softly against the stones; and the
whole space about you was filled with a soft and mighty
sighing. It spoke so benignly to little Johann! it bade him
close his eyes, it told him that all was well. But just then
Ida would say, “Come, little Hanno. It’s supper-time. We
must go. If you were to sit here and go to sleep, you’d
die.” How calm his heart felt, how evenly it beat, after a
visit to the sea! Then he had his supper in his room—for
his mother ate later, down in the glass verandah—and drank
milk or malt extract, and lay down in his little bed, between
the soft old linen sheets, and almost at once sleep overcame
him, and he slept, to the subdued rhythm of the evening concert
and the regular pulsations of his quiet heart.</p>

<p>On Sunday the Senator appeared, with the other gentlemen
who had stopped in town during the week, and remained
until Monday morning. Ices and champagne were served at
the table-d’hôte, and there were donkey-rides and sailing-parties
out to the open sea. Still, little Johann did not care
much for these Sundays. The peaceful isolation of the bathing-place
was broken in upon. A crowd of townsfolk—good
middle-class trippers, Ida Jungmann called them—populated
the Kurgarden and crowded the beach, drank coffee and
listened to the music. Hanno would have liked to stay in his
room until these kill-joys in their Sunday clothes went away
again. No, he was glad when everything returned to its
regular course on Monday—and he felt relieved to feel his
father’s eyes no more upon him.</p>

<p>Two weeks had passed; and Hanno said to himself, and to
every one who would listen to him, that there was still as
much time left as the whole of the Michaelmas holidays
amounted to. It consoled him to say this, but after all it
was a specious consolation, for the crest of the holidays had
been reached, and from now on they were going downhill—so
quickly, so frightfully quickly, that he would have liked
to cling to every moment, not to let it escape; to lengthen
every breath he drew of the sea air; to taste every second of
his joy.</p>

<p>But the time went on, relentless: in rain and sun, sea-wind
and land-wind, long spells of brooding warmth and
endless noisy storms that could not get away out to sea and
went on for ever so long. There were days on which the
north-east wind filled the bay with dark green floods, covered
the beach with seaweed, mussels, and jelly-fish, and threatened
the bathing-huts. The turbid, heavy sea was covered far and
wide with foam. The mighty waves came on in awful, awe-inspiring
calm, and the under side of each was a sharp
metallic green; then they crashed with an ear-splitting roar,
hissing and thundering along the sand. There were other
days when the west wind drove back the sea for a long
distance, exposing a gently rolling beach and naked sand-banks
everywhere, while the rain came down in torrents.
Heaven, earth, and sea flowed into each other, and the driving
wind carried the rain against the panes so that not drops
but rivers flowed down, and made them impossible to see
through. Then Hanno stayed in the salon of the Kurhouse
and played on the little piano that was used to play waltzes
and schottisches for the balls and was not so good for
improvising on as the piano at home: still one could sometimes
get amusing effects out of its muffled and clacking
keys. And there were still other days, dreamy, blue, windless,
broodingly warm, when the blue flies buzzed in the
sun above the Leuchtenfield, and the sea lay silent and
like a mirror, without stir or breath. When there were only
three days left Hanno said to himself, and to everybody else,
that the time remaining was just as long as a Whitsuntide
holiday; but, incontestable as this reckoning was, it did not
convince even himself. He knew now that the man in the
worsted coat was right, and that they would, in very truth,
begin again where they had left off, and go on to this and
that.</p>

<p>The laden carriage stood before the door. The day had
come. Early in the morning Hanno had said good-bye to sea
and strand. Now he said it to the waiters as they received
their fees, to the music pavilion, the rose-beds, and the whole
long summer as well. And amid the bows of the hotel
servants the carriage drove off.</p>

<p>They passed the avenue that led to the little town, and
rolled along the front. Ida Jungmann sat, white-haired,
bright-eyed, and angular, opposite Hanno on the back seat,
and he squeezed his head into the corner and looked past her
out of the window. The morning sky was overcast; the
Trave was full of little waves that hurried before the wind.
Now and then rain-drops spattered the pane. At the farther
end of the front, people sat before their house doors and
mended nets; barefoot children ran past, and stared inquisitively
at the occupants of the carriage. <i>They</i> did not
need to go away!</p>

<p>As they left the last houses behind, Hanno bent forward
once more to look after the lighthouse; then he leaned back
and closed his eyes. “We’ll come back again next year,
darling,” Ida Jungmann said in her grave, soothing voice.
It needed only that to make Hanno’s chin tremble and the
tears run down beneath his long dark lashes.</p>

<p>His face and hands were brown from the sea air. But if his
stay at the baths had been intended to harden him, to give
him more resistance, more energy, more endurance, then it
had failed of its purpose; and Hanno himself was aware
of this lamentable fact. These four weeks of sheltered
peace and adoration of the sea had not hardened him: they
had made him softer than ever, more dreamy and more sensitive.
He would be no better able to endure the rigours of
Herr Tietge’s class. The thought of the rules and history
dates which he had to get by heart had not lost its power to
make him shudder; he knew the feeling too well, and how he
would fling them away in desperation and go to bed, and
suffer next day the torments of the unprepared. And he
would be exactly as much afraid of catastrophes at the
recitation hour, of his enemies the Hagenströms, and of his
father’s injunctions not to be faint-hearted whatever else he
was.</p>

<p>But he felt cheered a little by the fresh morning drive
through flooded country roads, amid the twitterings of
birds. He thought of seeing Kai again, and Herr Pfühl; of
his music lessons, the piano and his harmonium. And as the
morrow was Sunday, a whole day still intervened between
him and the first lesson-hour. He could feel a few grains
of sand from the beach, still inside his buttoned boot—how
lovely! He would ask old Grobleben to leave them there.
Let it all begin again—the worsted-coats, the Hagenströms,
and the rest. He had what he had. When the waves of
tribulation went over him once more he would think of the
sea and of the Kurgarden, and of the sound made by the
little waves, coming hither out of the mysterious slumbering
distance. One single memory of the sound they made as they
plashed against the breakwater could make him oppose an
invincible front to all the pains and penalties of his life.</p>

<p>Then came the ferry, and Israelsdorfer Avenue, Jerusalem
Hill, and the Castle Field, on the right side of which
rose the walls of the prison where Uncle Weinschenk was.
Then the carriage rolled along Castle Street and over the
Koberg, crossed Broad Street, and braked down the steep decline
of Fishers’ Lane. There was the red house-front with
the bow-window and the white caryatides; and as they went
from the midday warmth of the street into the coolness of the
stone-flagged entry the Senator, with his pen in his hand, came
out of the office to greet them.</p>

<p>Slowly, slowly, with secret tears, little Johann learned
to live without the sea; to lead an existence that was
frightened and bored by turns; to keep out of the way of the
Hagenströms; to console himself with Kai and Herr Pfühl
and his music.</p>

<p>The Broad Street Buddenbrooks and Aunt Clothilde,
directly they saw him again, asked him how he liked school
after the holidays. They asked it teasingly, with that
curiously superior and slighting air which grown people
assume toward children, as if none of their affairs could
possibly be worthy of serious consideration; but Hanno was
proof against their questions.</p>

<p>Three or four days after the home-coming, Dr. Langhals, the
family physician, appeared in Fishers’ Lane to observe the
results of the cure. He had a long consultation with the
Frau Senator, and then Hanno was summoned and put, half
undressed, through a long examination of his “status
praesens,” as Dr. Langhals called it, looking at his fingernails.
He tested Hanno’s heart action and measured his
chest and his lamentable muscular development. He inquired
particularly after all his functions, and lastly, with a
hypodermic syringe, took a drop of blood from Hanno’s
slender arm to be tested at home. He seemed, in general,
not very well satisfied.</p>

<p>“We’ve got rather brown,” he said, putting his arm around
Hanno as he stood before him. He arranged his small black-felled
hand upon the boy’s shoulder, and looked up at the
Frau Senator and Ida Jungmann. “But we still look very
down in the mouth.”</p>

<p>“He is homesick for the sea,” said Gerda Buddenbrook.</p>

<p>“Oh, so you like being there?” asked Dr. Langhals, looking
with his shallow eyes into Hanno’s face. Hanno coloured.
What did Dr. Langhals mean by his question, to which he
plainly expected an answer? A fantastic hope rose up in
him, inspired by the belief that nothing was impossible to
God—despite all the worsted-coated men there were in the
world.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he brought out, with his wide eyes full upon Dr.
Langhals’ face. But after all, it seemed, the physician had
nothing particular in mind when he asked the question.</p>

<p>“Well, the effect of the bathing and the good air is bound
to show itself in time,” Dr. Langhals said. He tapped little
Johann on the shoulder and then put him away, with a nod
toward the Frau Senator and Ida Jungmann—a superior,
benevolent nod, the nod of the omniscient physician, used
to have people hanging on his lips. He got up, and the consultation
was at an end.</p>

<p>It was Aunt Antonie who best understood his yearning for
the sea, and the wound in his heart that healed so slowly and
was so likely to bleed afresh under the strain of everyday
life. Aunt Antonie loved to hear him talk about Travemünde,
and entered freely into his longings and enthusiasm.</p>

<p>“Yes, Hanno,” she said, “the truth is the truth, and Travemünde
is and always will be a beautiful spot. Till I go
down to my grave I shall remember the weeks I spent there
when I was a slip of a girl—and such a silly young girl! I
lived with people I was fond of, and who seemed to care for
me; I was a pretty young thing in those days,—though I’m
an old woman now—and full of life and high spirits. They
were splendid people, I can tell you, respectable and kind-hearted
and straight-thinking; and they were cleverer and
better educated, too, than any I’ve known since, and they had
more enthusiasm. Yes, my life seemed very full when I lived
with them, and I learned a great deal which I’ve never forgotten—information,
beliefs, opinions, ways of looking at
things. If other things hadn’t interfered—as all sorts of
things did, the way life does, you know—I might have learned
a great deal more from them. Shall I tell you how silly I
was in those days? I thought I could get the pretty star out
of the jelly-fish, and I carried a quantity home with me and
spread them in the sun on the balcony to dry. But when I
looked at them again, of course there was nothing but a big
wet spot, and a smell of rotten seaweed.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> the beginning of the year 1873 the Senate pardoned Hugo
Weinschenk, and the former Director left prison, six months
before his time was up.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder, if she had told the truth, would have
admitted that she was not so very glad. She had been living
peacefully with her daughter and granddaughter in Linden
Place, and had for society the house in Fishers’ Lane and her
friend Armgard von Maiboom, who had lived in the town since
her husband’s death. Frau Antonie had long been aware that
there was no place for her outside the walls of her native
city. She had her Munich memories, her weak digestion, and
an increasing need of quiet and repose; and she felt not the
least inclination to move to a large city of the united Fatherland,
still less to migrate to another country.</p>

<p>“My dear child,” she said to her daughter, “I must ask
you something very serious. Do you still love your husband
with your whole heart? Would you follow him with your
child wherever he went in the wide world—as, unfortunately,
it is not possible for him to remain here?”</p>

<p>And Frau Erica Weinschenk, amid tears that might have
meant anything at all, replied just as dutifully as Tony herself,
in similar circumstances, had once replied to the same
question, in the villa outside Hamburg. So it was necessary
to contemplate a parting in the near future.</p>

<p>On a day almost as dreadful as the day when he had been
arrested, Frau Permaneder brought her son-in-law from the
prison, in a closed carriage, to her house in Linden Place.
And there he stayed, after he had greeted his wife and
child in a dazed, helpless way, in the room that had been prepared
for him, smoking from early to late, without going
out, without even taking his meals with his family—a broken
grey-haired man.</p>

<p>He had always had a very strong constitution, and the
prison life could hardly have impaired his physical health.
But his condition was, none the less, pitiable in the extreme.
This man had in all probability done no more than his business
colleagues did every day and thought nothing of; if he had
not been caught, he would have gone on his way with head
erect and conscience clear. Yet it was dreadful to see how
his ruin as a citizen, the judicial correction, and the three
years’ imprisonment, had operated to break down his morale.
His testimony before the court had been given with the most
sincere conviction; and people who understood the technicalities
of the case supported his contention that he had merely
executed a bold manœuvre for the credit of his firm and himself—a
manœuvre known in the business world as usance.
The lawyers who had convicted him knew, in his opinion,
nothing whatever about such things and lived in quite a different
world. But their conviction, endorsed by the governing
power of the state, had shattered his self-esteem to such a
degree that he could not look anybody in the face. Gone was
his elastic tread, the way he had of wriggling at the waist of
his frock-coat and balancing with his fists and rolling his
eyes about. Gone was the ignorant self-assurance with which
he had delivered his uninformed opinions and put his questions.
The change was such that his family shuddered at it—and indeed
it was frightful to see such cowardice, dejection, and
lack of self-respect.</p>

<p>Herr Hugo Weinschenk spent eight or ten days doing nothing
but smoking: then he began to read the papers and write
letters. The consequence of the letters was that after another
eight or ten days he explained vaguely that there seemed to be
a position for him in London, whither he wished to travel
alone to arrange matters personally, and then to send for wife
and child.</p>

<p>Accompanied by Erica, he drove to the station in a closed
carriage and departed without having once seen any other
members of the family.</p>

<p>Some days later a letter addressed to his wife arrived from
Hamburg. It said that he had made up his mind not to send
for his wife and child, or even to communicate with them,
until such time as he could offer them a life fitting for them
to live. And this letter was the very last sign of life from
Hugo Weinschenk. No one from then henceforward heard
anything from him. The experienced Frau Permaneder made
several energetic attempts to get into touch with him, in order,
as she importantly explained, to get evidence upon which to
sue him for divorce on the ground of wilful desertion. But
he was, and remained, missing. And thus it came about that
Erica Weinschenk and her small daughter Elisabeth remained
now, as before, with Erica’s mother, in the light and airy
apartment in Linden Place.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER V</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> marriage of which little Johann had been the issue had
never lost charm in the town as a subject for conversation.
Since both of the parties to it were still felt to have something
queer about them, the union itself must partake of that
character of the strange and uncanny which they each possessed.
To get behind it even a little, to look beneath the
scanty outward facts to the bottom of this relation, seemed a
difficult, but certainly a stimulating task. And in bedrooms
and sitting-rooms, in clubs and casinos, yes, even on ’Change
itself, people still talked about Gerda and Thomas
Buddenbrook.</p>

<p>How had these two come to marry, and what sort of relationship
was theirs? Everybody remembered the sudden resolve
of Thomas Buddenbrook eighteen years ago, when he
was thirty years old. “This one or no one,” he had said.
It must have been something of the same sort with Gerda, for
it was well known that she had refused everybody up to her
twenty-seventh year, and then forthwith lent an ear to this
particular wooer. It must have been a love match, people
said: they granted that the three hundred thousand thaler
had probably not played much of a rôle. But of that
which any ordinary person would call love, there was very
little to be seen between the pair. They had displayed from
the very beginning a correct, respectful politeness, quite extraordinary
between husband and wife. And what was still
more odd it seemed not to proceed out of any inner estrangement,
but out of a peculiar, silent, deep mutual knowledge.
This had not at all altered with the years. The one change
due to the passage of time was an outward one. It was only
this: that the difference in years began to make itself plainly
visible.</p>

<p>When you saw them together you felt that here was a
rapidly aging man, already a little heavy, with his young
wife at his side. Thomas Buddenbrook was going off very
much, and this despite the now almost laughable vanity by
which he kept himself up. On the other hand, Gerda had
scarcely altered in these eighteen years. She seemed to be, as
it were, conserved in the nervous coldness which was the
essence of her being. Her lovely dark-red hair had kept
its colour, the white skin its smooth texture, the figure its
lofty aristocratic slimness. In the corners of her rather too
small and close-set brown eyes were the same blue shadows.
You could not trust those eyes. Their look was strange, and
what was written in it impossible to decipher. This woman’s
personality was so cool, so reserved, so repressed, so distant,
she showed so little human warmth for anything but her music—how
could one help feeling a vague mistrust? People unearthed
wise old saws on the subject of human nature and
applied them to Senator Buddenbrook’s wife. Still waters
were known to run deep. Some people were slyer than foxes.
And as they searched for an explanation, their limited imaginations
soon led them to the theory that the lovely Gerda was
deceiving her aging husband.</p>

<p>They watched, and before long they felt sure that Gerda’s
conduct, to put it mildly, passed the bounds of propriety in
her relations with Herr Lieutenant von Throta.</p>

<p>Renée Maria von Throta came from the Rhineland. He
was second lieutenant of one of the infantry battalions quartered
in the town. The red collar went well with his black
hair, which he wore parted on the side and combed back in
a high, thick curling crest from his white forehead. He
looked big and strong enough, but was most unmilitary in
speech and manner. He had a way of running one hand in
between the buttons of his half-open undress coat and of sitting
with his head supported on the back of his hand. His
bows were devoid of military stiffness, and you could not hear
his heels click together as he made them. And he had no
more respect for his uniform than for ordinary clothes. Even
the slim youthful moustaches that ran slantwise down to the
corners of his mouth had neither point nor consistency;
they only confirmed the unmartial impression he gave. The
most remarkable thing about him was his eyes, so large, black,
and extraordinarily brilliant that they seemed like glowing
bottomless depths when he visited anything or anybody with
his glance which was sparkling, ardent, or languishing by
turns.</p>

<p>He had probably gone into the army against his will, or
at least without any inclination for it; and despite his
physique he was no good in the service. He was unregarded
by his comrades, and shared but little in their interests—the
interests and pleasures of young officers lately back from a
victorious campaign. And they found him a disagreeable
oddity, who did not care for horses or hunting or play or
women. All his thoughts were bent on music. He was to be
seen at all the concerts, with his languishing eyes and his lax,
unmilitary, theatrical attitudes; on the other hand he despised
the club and the casino and never went near them.</p>

<p>He made the duty calls which his position demanded;
but the Buddenbrook house was the only one at which he
visited—too much, people thought, and the Senator himself
thought so too.</p>

<p>No one dreamed what went on in Thomas Buddenbrook.
No one must guess. But it was just this keeping everybody in
ignorance of his mortification, his hatred, his powerlessness,
that was so cruelly hard! People were beginning to find him
a little ludicrous; but perhaps their laugh would have turned
to pity if they had even dimly suspected how much he was on
his guard against their laughter! He had seen it coming long
before, he had felt it beforehand, before any one else had such
an idea in his head. His much-carped-at vanity had its source
largely in this fear. He had been first to see, with dismay,
the growing disparity between himself and his lovely wife, on
whom the years had not laid a finger. And now, since the
advent of Herr von Throta, he had to fight with the last remnant
of his strength to dissimulate his own misgivings, in order
that they might not make him a laughing-stock in the eyes of
the community.</p>

<p>Gerda Buddenbrook and the eccentric young officer met
each other, naturally, in the world of music. Herr von Throta
played the piano, violin, viola, cello, and flute, and played
them all unusually well. Often the Senator became aware of
an impending visit when Herr von Throta’s man passed the
office-door with his master’s cello-case on his back. Thomas
Buddenbrook would sit at his desk and watch until he
saw his wife’s friend enter the house. Then, overhead in
the salon, the harmonies would rise and surge like waves,
with singing, lamenting, unearthly jubilation; would lift like
clasped hands outstretched toward Heaven; would float in
vague ecstasies; would sink and die away into sobbing, into
night and silence. But they might roll and seethe, weep and
exult, foam up and enfold each other, as unnaturally as they
liked! They were not the worst. The worst, the actually
torturing thing, was the silence. It would sometimes reign so
long, so long, and so profoundly, above there in the salon,
that it was impossible not to feel afraid of it. There would be
no tread upon the ceiling, not even a chair would move—simply
a soundless, speechless, deceiving, <i>secret</i> silence.
Thomas Buddenbrook would sit there, and the torture was
such that he sometimes softly groaned.</p>

<p>What was it that he feared? Once more people had seen
Herr von Throta enter his house. And with their eyes he
beheld the picture just as they saw it: Below, an aging man,
worn out and crotchety, sat at his window in the office; above,
his beautiful wife made music with her lover. <i>And not that
alone.</i> Yes, that was the way the thing looked to them. He
knew it. He was aware, too, that the word “lover” was
not really descriptive of Herr von Throta. It would have
been almost a relief if it were. If he could have understood
and despised him as an empty-headed, ordinary youth who
worked off his average endowment of high spirits in a little
music, and thus beguiled the feminine heart! He tried to
think of him like that. He tried to summon up the instincts
of his father to meet the case: the instincts of the thrifty merchant
against the frivolous, adventurous, unreliable military
caste. He called Herr von Throta “the lieutenant,” and tried
to think of him as that; but in his heart he was conscious that
the name was inappropriate.</p>

<p>What was it that Thomas Buddenbrook feared? Nothing—nothing
to put a name to. If there had only been something
tangible, some simple, brutal fact, something to defend
himself against! He envied people the simplicity of their
conceptions. For while he sat there in torments, with his head
in his hands, he knew all too well that “betrayal,” “adultery,”
were not words to describe the singing things, the abysmally
silent things, that were happening up there.</p>

<p>He looked up sometimes at the grey gables, at the people
passing by, at the jubilee present hanging above his desk
with the portraits of his forefathers: he thought of the history
of his house, and said to himself that this was all that was
wanting: that his person should become a byword, his name
and family life a scandal among the people. This was all
that was lacking to set the crown upon the whole. And the
thought, again, almost did him good, because it was a simple,
comprehensible, normal thought, that one could think and
express—quite another matter from this brooding over a
mysterious disgrace, a blot upon his family ’scutcheon.</p>

<p>He could bear it no more. He shoved back his chair, left
the office, and went upstairs. Whither should he go?
Into the salon, to be greeted with unembarrassed slight condescension
by Herr von Throta, to ask him to supper and be
refused? For one of the worst features of the case was
that the lieutenant avoided him, refused all official invitations
from the head of the house, and confined himself to the free
and private intercourse with its mistress.</p>

<p>Should he wait? Sit down somewhere, perhaps in the
smoking-room, until the lieutenant went, and then go to
Gerda and speak out, and call her to account? Ah, one did
not speak out with Gerda, one did not call her to account.
Why should one? Their alliance was based on mutual consideration,
tact, and silence. To become a laughing-stock before
her, too—no, surely he was not called upon to do that.
To play the jealous husband would be to grant that outsiders
were right, to proclaim a scandal, to cry it aloud. Was he
jealous? Of whom? Of what? Alas, no! Jealousy—the
word meant action: mistaken, crazy, wrong action, perhaps,
but at least action, energetic, fearless, and conclusive. No,
he only felt a slight anxiety, a harassing worry, over the
whole thing.</p>

<p>He went into his dressing-room and bathed his face with
eau-de-cologne. Then he descended to the music-room, determined
to break the silence there, cost what it would. He
laid his hand on the door-knob—but now the music struck up
again with a stormy outburst of sound, and he shrank back.</p>

<p>One day in such an hour, he was leaning over the balcony
of the second floor, looking down the well of the staircase.
Everything was quite still. Little Johann came out of his
room, down the gallery steps, and across the corridor, on his
way to Ida Jungmann’s room. He slipped along the wall
with his book, and would have passed his father with lowered
eyes, and a murmured greeting; but the Senator spoke to
him.</p>

<p>“Well, Hanno, and what are you doing?”</p>

<p>“Studying my lessons, Papa. I am going to Ida, to have
her hear my translation—”</p>

<p>“Well, and what do you have to-morrow?”</p>

<p>Hanno, still looking down, made an obvious effort to give
a prompt, alert, and correct answer to the question. He
swallowed once and said, “We have Cornelius Nepos, some
accounts to copy, French grammar, the rivers of North America,
German theme-correcting—”</p>

<p>He stopped and felt provoked with himself; he could not
remember any more, and wished he had said <i>and</i> and let his
voice fall, it sounded so abrupt and unfinished. “Nothing
else,” he said as decidedly as he could, without looking up.
But his father did not seem to be listening. He held Hanno’s
free hand and played with it absently, unconsciously fingering
the slim fingers.</p>

<p>And then Hanno heard something that had nothing to do
with the lessons at all: his father’s voice, in a tone he had
never heard before, low, distressed, almost imploring:
“Hanno—the lieutenant has been more than two hours with
Mamma—”</p>

<p>Little Hanno opened wide his gold-brown eyes at the sound:
and they looked, as never before, clear, large, and loving,
straight into his father’s face, with its reddened eyelids under
the light brows, its white puffy cheeks and long stiff moustaches.
God knows how much he understood. But one thing
they both felt: in the long second when their eyes met, all
constraint, coldness, and misunderstanding melted away.
Hanno might fail his father in all that demanded vitality,
energy and strength. But where fear and suffering were in
question, there Thomas Buddenbrook could count on the devotion
of his son. On that common ground they met as one.</p>

<p>He did not realize this—he tried not to realize it. In the
days that followed, he urged Hanno on more sternly than
ever to practical preparations for his future career. He
tested his mental powers, pressed him to commit himself upon
the subject of his calling, and grew irritated at every sign
of rebellion or fatigue. For the truth was that Thomas Buddenbrook,
at the age of forty-eight, began to feel that his days
were numbered, and to reckon with his own approaching
death.</p>

<p>His health had failed. Loss of appetite, sleeplessness, dizziness,
and the chills to which he had always been subject
forced him several times to call in Dr. Langhals. But he did
not follow the doctor’s orders. His will-power had grown
flabby in these years of idleness or petty activity. He slept late
in the morning, though every evening he made an angry resolve
to rise early and take the prescribed walk before breakfast.
Only two or three times did he actually carry out the resolve;
and it was the same with everything else. And the constant
effort to spur on his will, with the constant failure to do so,
consumed his self-respect and made him a prey to despair.
He never even tried to give up his cigarettes; he could not
do without the pleasant narcotic effect; he had smoked them
from his youth up. He told Dr. Langhals to his vapid face:
“You see, Doctor, it is your duty to forbid me cigarettes—a
very easy and agreeable duty. But I have to obey the
order—that is my share, and you can look on at it. No, we
will work together over my health; but I find the work unevenly
divided—too much of yours falls to me. Don’t laugh;
it is no joke. One is so frightfully alone—well, I smoke.
Will you have one?” He offered his case.</p>

<p>All his powers were on the decline. What strengthened
in him was the conviction that it could not last long, that
the end was close at hand. He suffered from strange apprehensive
fancies. Sometimes at table it seemed to him that
he was no longer sitting with his family, but hovering above
them somewhere and looking down upon them from a great
distance. “I am going to die,” he said to himself. And he
would call Hanno to him repeatedly and say: “My son, I
may be taken away from you sooner than you think. And
then you will be called upon to take my place. I was called
upon very young myself. Can you understand that I am
troubled by your indifference? Are you now resolved in
your mind? Yes? Oh, ‘yes’ is no answer! Again you
won’t answer me! What I ask you is, have you resolved,
bravely and joyfully, to take up your burden? Do you imagine
that you won’t have to work, that you will have enough
money without? You will have nothing, or very, very little;
you will be thrown upon your own resources. If you want
to live, and live well, you will have to work hard, harder
even than I did.”</p>

<p>But this was not all. It was not only the burden of his
son’s future, the future of his house, that weighed him down.
There was another thought that took command, that mastered
him and spurred on his weary thoughts. And it was this:
As soon as he began to think of his mortal end not as an indefinite
remote event, almost a contingency, but as something
near and tangible for which it behoved him to prepare, he
began to investigate himself, to examine his relations to death
and questions of another world. And his earliest researches
in this kind discovered in himself an irremediable unpreparedness.</p>

<p>His father had united with his hard practical sense a literal
faith, a fanatic Bible-Christianity which his mother, in her
latter years, had adhered to as well; but to himself it had
always been rather repellant. The worldly scepticism of his
grandfather had been more nearly his own attitude. But the
comfortable superficiality of old Johann could not satisfy
his metaphysical and spiritual needs, and he ended by finding
in evolution the answer to all his questions about eternity
and immortality. He said to himself that he had lived in his
forbears and would live on in his descendants. And this line
which he had taken coincided not only with his sense of
family, his patrician self-consciousness, his ancestor-worship,
as it were; it had also strengthened his ambitions and through
them the whole course of his existence. But now, before the
near and penetrating eye of death, it fell away; it was nothing,
it gave him not one single hour of calm, of readiness for the
end.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook had played now and then throughout
his life with an inclination to Catholicism. But he was
at bottom, none the less, the born Protestant: full of the true
Protestant’s passionate, relentless sense of personal responsibility.
No, in the ultimate things there was, there could be,
no help from outside, no mediation, no absolution, no
soothing-syrup, no panacea. Each one of us, alone, unaided,
of his own powers, must unravel the riddle before it was too
late, must wring for himself a pious readiness before the
hour of death, or else part in despair. Thomas Buddenbrook
turned away, desperate and hopeless, from his only son, in
whom he had once hoped to live on, renewed and strong,
and began in fear and haste to seek for the truth which must
somewhere exist for him.</p>

<p>It was high summer of the year 1874. Silvery, high-piled
clouds drifted across the deep blue sky above the garden’s
dainty symmetry. The birds twittered in the boughs of the
walnut tree, the fountain splashed among the irises, and
the scent of the lilacs floated on the breeze, mingled, alas,
with the smell of hot syrup from a sugar-factory nearby.
To the astonishment of the staff, the Senator now often left
his work during office hours, to pace up and down in the
garden with his hands behind his back, or to work about, raking
the gravel paths, tying up the rose-bushes, or dredging
mud out of the fountain. His face, with its light eyebrows,
seemed serious and attentive as he worked; but his thoughts
travelled far away in the dark on their lonely, painful path.</p>

<p>Sometimes he seated himself on the little terrace, in the
pavilion now entirely overgrown with green, and stared across
the garden at the red brick rear wall of the house. The air
was warm and sweet; it seemed as though the peaceful sounds
about him strove to lull him to sleep. Weary of loneliness
and silence and staring into space, he would close his eyes
now and then, only to snatch them open and harshly frighten
peace away. “I must think,” he said, almost aloud. “I
must arrange everything before it is too late.”</p>

<p>He sat here one day, in the pavilion, in the little reed
rocking-chair, and read for four hours, with growing absorption,
in a book which had, partly by chance, come into his
hands. After second breakfast, cigarette in mouth, he had
unearthed it in the smoking-room, from behind some stately
volumes in the corner of a bookcase, and recalled that he
had bought it at a bargain one day years ago. It was a
large volume, poorly printed on cheap paper and poorly
sewed; the second part, only, of a famous philosophical
system. He had brought it out with him into the garden, and
now he turned the pages, profoundly interested.</p>

<p>He was filled with a great, surpassing satisfaction. It
soothed him to see how a master-mind could lay hold on this
strong, cruel, mocking thing called life and enforce it and
condemn it. His was the gratification of the sufferer who has
always had a bad conscience about his sufferings and concealed
them from the gaze of a harsh, unsympathetic world,
until suddenly, from the hand of an authority, he receives,
as it were, justification and license for his suffering—justification
before the world, this best of all possible worlds
which the master-mind scornfully demonstrates to be the worst
of all possible ones!</p>

<p>He did not understand it all. Principles and premises remained
unclear, and his mind, unpractised in such readings,
was not able to follow certain trains of thought. But this
very alternation of vagueness and clarity, of dull incomprehension
with sudden bursts of light, kept him enthralled and
breathless, and the hours vanished without his looking up
from his book or changing his position in his chair.</p>

<p>He had left some pages unread in the beginning of the
book, and hurried on, clutching rapidly after the main thesis,
reading only this or that section which held his attention.
Then he struck on a comprehensive chapter and read it from
beginning to end, his lips tightly closed and his brows drawn
together with a concentration which had long been strange
to him, completely withdrawn from the life about him. The
chapter was called “On Death, and its Relation to our Personal
Immortality.”</p>

<p>Only a few lines remained when the servant came through
the garden at four o’clock to call him to dinner. He nodded,
read the remaining sentences, closed the book, and looked
about him. He felt that his whole being had unaccountably
expanded, and at the same time there clung about his senses a
profound intoxication, a strange, sweet, vague allurement
which somehow resembled the feelings of early love and
longing. He put away the book in the drawer of the garden
table. His hands were cold and unsteady, his head was
burning, and he felt in it a strange pressure and strain, as
though something were about to snap. He was not capable
of consecutive thought.</p>

<p>What was this? He asked himself the question as he
mounted the stairs and sat down to table with his family.
What is it? Have I had a revelation? What has happened
to me, Thomas Buddenbrook, Councillor of this government,
head of the grain firm of Johann Buddenbrook? Was this
message meant for me? Can I bear it? I don’t know what
it was: I only know it is too much for my poor brain.</p>

<p>He remained the rest of the day in this condition, this
heavy lethargy and intoxication, overpowered by the heady
draught he had drunk, incapable of thought. Evening came.
His head was heavy, and since he could hold it up no longer,
he went early to bed. He slept for three hours, more profoundly
than ever before in his life. And, then, suddenly,
abruptly, with a start, he awoke and felt as one feels on
realizing, suddenly, a budding love in the heart.</p>

<p>He was alone in the large sleeping chamber; for Gerda
slept now in Ida Jungmann’s room, and the latter had moved
into one of the three balcony rooms to be nearer little Johann.
It was dark, for the curtains of both high windows were
tightly closed. He lay on his back, feeling the oppression
of the stillness and of the heavy, warm air, and looked up
into the darkness.</p>

<p>And behold, it was as though the darkness were rent from
before his eyes, as if the whole wall of the night parted wide
and disclosed an immeasurable, boundless prospect of light.
“I shall live!” said Thomas Buddenbrook, almost aloud, and
felt his breast shaken with inward sobs. “This is the revelation:
that I shall live! For <i>it</i> will live—and that this <i>it</i> is
not I is only an illusion, an error which death will make plain.
This is it, this is it! Why?” But at this question the night
closed in again upon him. He saw, he knew, he understood,
no least particle more; he let himself sink deep in the pillows,
quite blinded and exhausted by the morsel of truth which
had been vouchsafed.</p>

<p>He lay still and waited fervently, feeling himself tempted
to pray that it would come again and irradiate his darkness.
And it came. With folded hands, not daring to move, he lay
and looked.</p>

<p>What <i>was</i> Death? The answer came, not in poor, large-sounding
words: he felt it within him, he possessed it. Death
was a joy, so great, so deep that it could be dreamed of only
in moments of revelation like the present. It was the return
from an unspeakably painful wandering, the correction
of a grave mistake, the loosening of chains, the opening of
doors—it put right again a lamentable mischance.</p>

<p>End, dissolution! These were pitiable words, and thrice
pitiable he who used them! What would end, what would
dissolve? Why, this his body, this heavy, faulty, hateful
incumbrance, which <i>prevented him from being something
other and better</i>.</p>

<p>Was not every human being a mistake and a blunder?
Was he not in painful arrest from the hour of his birth?
Prison, prison, bonds and limitations everywhere! The human
being stares hopelessly through the barred window of his
personality at the high walls of outward circumstance, till
Death comes and calls him home to freedom!</p>

<p>Individuality?—All, all that one is, can, and has, seems
poor, grey, inadequate, wearisome; what one is not, can not,
has not, that is what one looks at with a longing desire that
becomes love because it fears to become hate.</p>

<p>I bear in myself the seed, the tendency, the possibility of
all capacity and all achievement. Where should I be were
I not here? Who, what, how could I be, if I were not I—if
this my external self, my consciousness, did not cut me
off from those who are not I? Organism! Blind, thoughtless,
pitiful eruption of the urging will! Better, indeed, for the
will to float free in spaceless, timeless night than for it to
languish in prison, illumined by the feeble, flickering light
of the intellect!</p>

<p>Have I hoped to live on in my son? In a personality yet
more feeble, flickering, and timorous than my own? Blind,
childish folly! What can my son do for me—what need
have I of a son? Where shall I be when I am dead? Ah,
it is so brilliantly clear, so overwhelmingly simple! I shall
be in all those who have ever, do ever, or ever shall say “I”—<i>especially,
however, in all those who say it most fully, potently,
and gladly</i>!</p>

<p>Somewhere in the world a child is growing up, strong,
well-grown, adequate, able to develop its powers, gifted, untroubled,
pure, joyous, relentless, one of those beings whose
glance heightens the joy of the joyous and drives the unhappy
to despair. <i>He</i> is my son. He is I, myself, soon, soon; as
soon as Death frees me from the wretched delusion that I am
not he as well as myself.</p>

<p>Have I ever hated life—pure, strong, relentless life? Folly
and misconception! I have but hated myself, because I
could not bear it. I love you, I love you all, you blessed,
and soon, soon, I shall cease to be cut off from you all by
the narrow bonds of myself; soon will that in me which loves
you be free and be in and with you—in and with you all.</p>

<p>He wept, he pressed his face into the pillows and wept,
shaken through and through, lifted up in transports by a joy
without compare for its exquisite sweetness. This it was
which since yesterday had filled him as if with a heady, intoxicating
draught, had worked in his heart in the darkness of
the night and roused him like a budding love! And in so
far as he could now understand and recognize—not in words
and consecutive thoughts, but in sudden rapturous illuminations
of his inmost being—he was already free, already actually
released and free of all natural as well as artificial
limitations. The walls of his native town, in which he had
wilfully and consciously shut himself up, opened out; they
opened and disclosed to his view the entire world, of which
he had in his youth seen this or that small portion, and of
which Death now promised him the whole. The deceptive
perceptions of space, time and history, the preoccupation with
a glorious historical continuity of life in the person of his own
descendants, the dread of some future final dissolution and
decomposition—all this his spirit now put aside. He was
no longer prevented from grasping eternity. Nothing began,
nothing left off. There was only an endless present;
and that power in him which loved life with a love so exquisitely
sweet and yearning—the power of which his person
was only the unsuccessful expression—that power would
always know how to find access to this present.</p>

<p>“I shall live,” he whispered into his pillow. He wept, and
in the next moment knew not why. His brain stood still,
the vision was quenched. Suddenly there was nothing
more—he lay in dumb darkness. “It will come back,” he assured
himself. And before sleep inexorably wrapped him
round, he swore to himself never to let go this precious
treasure, but to read and study, to learn its powers, and to
make inalienably his own the whole conception of the universe
out of which his vision sprang.</p>

<p>But that could not be. Even the next day, as he woke
with a faint feeling of shame at the emotional extravagances
of the night, he suspected that it would be hard to put these
beautiful designs into practice.</p>

<p>He rose late and had to go at once to take part in the
debate at an assembly of burgesses. Public business, the
civic life that went on in the gabled narrow streets of this
middle-sized trading city, consumed his energies once more.
He still planned to take up the wonderful reading again where
he had left it off. But he questioned of himself whether the
events of that night had been anything firm and permanent;
whether, when Death approached, they would be found to hold
their ground.</p>

<p>His middle-class instincts rose against them—and his vanity,
too: the fear of being eccentric, of playing a laughable rôle.
Had he really seen these things? And did they really become
him—him, Thomas Buddenbrook, head of the firm of Johann
Buddenbrook?</p>

<p>He never succeeded in looking again into the precious
volume—to say nothing of buying its other parts. His days
were consumed by nervous pedantry: harassed by a thousand
details, all of them unimportant, he was too weak-willed to
arrive at a reasonable and fruitful arrangement of his time.
Nearly two weeks after that memorable afternoon he gave it
up—and ordered the maid-servant to fetch the book from the
drawer in the garden table and replace it in the bookcase.</p>

<p>And thus Thomas Buddenbrook, who had held his hands
stretched imploringly upward toward the high ultimate truth,
sank now weakly back to the images and conceptions of his
childhood. He strove to call back that personal God, the
Father of all human beings, who had sent a part of Himself
upon earth to suffer and bleed for our sins, and who, on
the final day, would come to judge the quick and the dead;
at whose feet the justified, in the course of the eternity then
beginning, would be recompensed for the sorrows they had
borne in this vale of tears. Yes, he strove to subscribe to
the whole confused unconvincing story, which required no
intelligence, only obedient credulity; and which, when the
last anguish came, would sustain one in a firm and childlike
faith.— But would it, really?</p>

<p>Ah, even here there was no peace. This poor, well-nigh
exhausted man, consumed with gnawing fears for the honour
of his house, his wife, his child, his name, his family, this
man who spent painful effort even to keep his body artificially
erect and well-preserved—this poor man tortured himself for
days with thoughts upon the moment and manner of death.
How would it really be? Did the soul go to Heaven immediately
after death, or did bliss first begin with the resurrection
of the flesh? And, if so, where did the soul stay until
that time? He did not remember ever having been taught
this. Why had he not been told this important fact in school
or in church? How was it justifiable for them to leave
people in such uncertainty? He considered visiting Pastor
Pringsheim and seeking advice and counsel; but he gave it
up in the end for fear of being ridiculous.</p>

<p>And finally he gave it all up—he left it all to God.
But having come to such an unsatisfactory ending of his attempts
to set his spiritual affairs in order, he determined at
least to spare no pains over his earthly ones, and to carry
out a plan which he had long entertained.</p>

<p>One day little Johann heard his father tell his mother,
as they drank their coffee in the living-room after the midday
meal, that he expected Lawyer So-and-So to make his
will. He really ought not to keep on putting it off. Later,
in the afternoon, Hanno practised his music for an hour.
When he went down the corridor after that, he met, coming
up the stairs, his father and a gentleman in a long black
overcoat.</p>

<p>“Hanno,” said the Senator, curtly. And little Johann
stopped, swallowed, and said quickly and softly: “Yes,
Papa.”</p>

<p>“I have some important business with this gentleman,”
his father went on. “Will you stand before the door into the
smoking-room and take care that nobody—absolutely nobody,
you understand—disturbs us?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Papa,” said little Johann, and took up his post
before the door, which closed after the two gentlemen.</p>

<p>He stood there, clutching his sailor’s knot with one hand,
felt with his tongue for a doubtful tooth, and listened to the
earnest subdued voices which could be heard from inside.
His head, with the curling light-brown hair, he held on one
side, and his face with the frowning brows and blue-shadowed,
gold-brown eyes, wore that same displeased and brooding
look with which he had inhaled the odour of the flowers,
and that other strange, yet half-familiar odour, by his grandmother’s
bier.</p>

<p>Ida Jungmann passed and said, “Well, little Hanno, why
are you hanging about here?”</p>

<p>And the hump-backed apprentice came out of the office with
a telegram, and asked for the Senator.</p>

<p>But, both times, little Johann put his arm in its blue sailor
sleeve with the anchor on it horizontally across the door;
both times he shook his head and said softly, after a pause,
“No one may go in. Papa is making his will.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VI</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">In</span> the autumn Dr. Langhals said, making play like a woman
with his beautiful eyes: “It is the nerves, Senator; the nerves
are to blame for everything. And once in a while the circulation
is not what it should be. May I venture to make a
suggestion? You need another little rest. These few Sundays
by the sea, during the summer, haven’t amounted to
much, of course. It’s the end of September, Travemünde
is still open, there are still a few people there. Drive over,
Senator, and sit on the beach a little. Two or three weeks
will do you a great deal of good.”</p>

<p>And Thomas Buddenbrook said “yes” and “amen.” But
when he told his family of the arrangement, Christian suggested
going with him.</p>

<p>“I’ll go with you, Thomas,” he said, quite simply. “You
don’t mind, I suppose.” And the Senator, though he did
mind very much, said “yes” and “amen” to this arrangement
as well.</p>

<p>Christian was now more than ever master of his own time.
His fluctuating health had constrained him to give up his
last undertaking, the champagne and spirit agency. The man
who used to come and sit on his sofa and nod at him in the
twilight had happily not recurred of late. But the misery
in the side had, if anything, grown worse, and added to
this was a whole list of other infirmities of which Christian
kept the closest watch, and which he described in all companies,
with his nose wrinkled up. He often suffered from
that long-standing dread of paralysis of the tongue, throat,
and œsophagus, even of the extremities and of the brain—of
which there were no actual symptoms, but the fear in
itself was almost worse. He told in detail how, one day
when he was making tea, he had held the lighted match not
over the spirit-lamp, but over the open bottle of methylated
spirit instead; so that not only himself, but the people in his
own and the adjacent buildings, nearly went up in flames.
And he dwelt in particular detail, straining every resource he
had at his command to make himself perfectly clear, upon a
certain ghastly anomaly which he had of late observed in himself.
It was this: that on certain days, i.e., under certain
weather conditions, and in certain states of mind, he could
not see an open window without having a horrible and inexplicable
impulse to jump out. It was a mad and almost
uncontrollable desire, a sort of desperate foolhardiness. The
family were dining on Sunday in Fishers’ Lane, and he described
how he had to summon all his powers, and crawl on
hands and knees to the window to shut it. At this point
everybody shrieked; his audience rebelled, and would listen
no more.</p>

<p>He told these and similar things with a certain horrible
satisfaction. But the thing about himself which he did not
know, which he never studied and described, but which none
the less grew worse and worse, was his singular lack of tact.
He told in the family circle anecdotes of such a nature that
the club was the only possible place for them. And even
his sense of personal modesty seemed to be breaking down.
He was on friendly terms with his sister-in-law, Gerda. But
when he displayed to her the beautiful weave and texture
of his English socks, he did not stop at that, but rolled up
his wide, checkered trouser-leg to far above the knee:
“Look,” he said, wrinkling his nose in distress: “Look how
thin I’m getting. Isn’t it striking and unusual?” And there
he sat, sadly gazing at his crooked, bony leg and the gaunt
knee visible through his white woollen drawers.</p>

<p>His mercantile activity then, was a thing of the past. But
such hours as he did not spend at the club he liked to fill
in with one sort of occupation or another; and he would
proudly point out that he had never actually ceased to work.
He extended his knowledge of languages and embarked upon
a study of Chinese—though this was for the sake of acquiring
knowledge, simply, with no practical purpose in view. He
worked at it industriously for two weeks. He was also, just
at this time, occupied with a project of enlarging an English-German
dictionary which he had found inadequate. But he
really needed a little change, and it would be better too for
the Senator to have somebody with him; so he did not allow
his business to keep him in town.</p>

<p>The two brothers drove out together to the sea along the
turnpike, which was nothing but a puddle. The rain drummed
on the carriage-top, and they hardly spoke. Christian’s eyes
roved hither and yon; he was as if listening to uncanny
noises. Thomas sat muffled in his cloak, shivering, gazing
with bloodshot eyes, his moustaches stiffly sticking out beyond
his white cheeks. They drove up to the Kurhouse in the
afternoon, their wheels grating in the wet gravel. Old Broker
Gosch sat in the glass verandah, drinking rum punch. He
stood up, whistling through his teeth, and they all sat down
together to have a little something warm while the trunks
were being carried up.</p>

<p>Herr Gosch was a late guest at the cure, and there were
a few other people as well: an English family, a Dutch
maiden lady, and a Hamburg bachelor, all of them presumably
taking their rest before table-d’hôte, for it was
like the grave everywhere but for the sound of the rain.
Let them sleep! As for Herr Gosch, he was not in the habit
of sleeping in the daytime. He was glad enough to get a
few hours’ sleep at night. He was far from well; he was
taking a late cure for the benefit of this trembling which he
suffered from in all his limbs. Hang it, he could hardly hold
his glass of grog; and more often than not he could not
write at all—so that the translation of Lope da Vega got on
but slowly. He was in a very low mood indeed, and even his
curses lacked relish. “Let it go hang!” was his constant
phrase, which he repeated on every occasion and often on
none at all.</p>

<p>And the Senator? How was he feeling? How long were
the gentlemen thinking of stopping?</p>

<p>Oh, Dr. Langhals had sent him out on account of his nerves.
He had obeyed orders, of course, despite the frightful
weather—what doesn’t one do out of fear of one’s physician?
He was really feeling more or less miserable, and they would
probably remain till there was a little improvement.</p>

<p>“Yes, I’m pretty wretched too,” said Christian, irritated
at Thomas’s speaking only of himself. He was about to fetch
out his repertoire—the nodding man, the spirit-bottle, the
open window—when the Senator interrupted him by going to
engage the rooms.</p>

<p>The rain did not stop. It washed away the earth, it
danced upon the sea, which was driven back by the south-west
wind and left the beaches bare. Everything was
shrouded in grey. The steamers went by like wraiths and
vanished on the dim horizon.</p>

<p>They met the strange guests only at table. The Senator,
in mackintosh and goloshes, went walking with Gosch; Christian
drank Swedish punch with the barmaid in the
pastry-shop.</p>

<p>Two or three times in the afternoon it looked as though
the sun were coming out; and a few acquaintances from
town appeared—people who enjoyed a holiday away from
their families: Senator Dr. Gieseke, Christian’s friend, and
Consul Peter Döhlmann, who looked very ill indeed, and was
killing himself with Hunyadi-Janos water. The gentlemen
sat together in their overcoats, under the awnings of the
pastry-shop, opposite the empty bandstand, drinking their
coffee, digesting their five courses, and talking desultorily as
they gazed over the empty garden.</p>

<p>The news of the town—the last high water, which had gone
into the cellars and been so deep that in the lower part of the
town people had to go about in boats; a fire in the dockyard
sheds; a senatorial election—these were the topics of conversation.
Alfred Lauritzen, of the firm of Stürmann &amp;
Lauritzen, tea, coffee, and spice merchants, had been elected,
and Senator Buddenbrook had not approved of the choice.
He sat smoking cigarettes, wrapped in his cloak, almost silent
except for a few remarks on this particular subject. One
thing was certain, he said, and that was that <i>he</i> had not voted
for Herr Lauritzen. Lauritzen was an honest fellow and a
good man of business. There was no doubt of that; but he
was middle-class, respectable middle-class. His father had
fished herrings out of the barrel and handed them across the
counter to servant-maids with his own hands—and now they
had in the Senate the proprietor of a retail business. His,
Thomas Buddenbrook’s father had disowned his eldest son for
“marrying a shop”; but that was in the good old days. “The
standard is being lowered,” he said. “The social level is not
so high as it was; the Senate is being democratized, my dear
Gieseke, and that is no good. Business ability is one
thing—but it is not everything. In my view we should demand
something more. Alfred Lauritzen, with his big feet
and his boatswain’s face—it is offensive to me to think of
him in the Senate-house. It offends something in me, I don’t
know what. It goes against my sense of form—it is a piece
of bad taste, in short.”</p>

<p>Senator Gieseke demurred. He was rather piqued by this
expression of opinion. After all, he himself was only the
son of a Fire Commissioner. No, the labourer was worthy
of his hire. That was what being a republican meant. “You
ought not to smoke so much, Buddenbrook,” he ended. “You
won’t get any sea air.”</p>

<p>“I’ll stop now,” said Thomas Buddenbrook, flung away
the end of his cigarette, and closed his eyes.</p>

<p>The conversation dragged on; the rain set in again and
veiled the prospect. They began to talk about the latest town
scandal—about P. Philipp Kassbaum, who had been falsifying
bills of exchange and now sat behind locks and bars. No
one felt outraged over the dishonesty: they spoke of it as
an act of folly, laughed a bit, and shrugged their shoulders.
Senator Dr. Gieseke said that the convicted man had not lost
his spirits. He had asked for a mirror, it seemed, there being
none in his cell. “I’ll need a looking-glass,” he was reported
to have said: “I shall be here for some time.” He
had been, like Christian and Dr. Gieseke, a pupil of the lamented
Marcellus Stengel.</p>

<p>They all laughed again at this, through their noses, without
a sign of feeling. Siegismund Gosch ordered another grog in
a tone of voice that was as good as saying, “What’s the use
of living?” Consul Döhlmann sent for a bottle of brandy.
Christian felt inclined to more Swedish punch, so Dr. Gieseke
ordered some for both of them. Before long Thomas Buddenbrook
began to smoke again.</p>

<p>And the idle, cynical, indifferent talk went on, heavy with
the food they had eaten, the wine they drank, and the damp
that depressed their spirits. They talked about business, the
business of each one of those present; but even this subject
roused no great enthusiasm.</p>

<p>“Oh, there’s nothing very good about mine,” said Thomas
Buddenbrook heavily, and leaned his head against the back
of his chair with an air of disgust.</p>

<p>“Well, and you, Döhlmann,” asked Senator Gieseke, and
yawned. “You’ve been devoting yourself entirely to brandy,
eh?”</p>

<p>“The chimney can’t smoke, unless there’s a fire,” the Consul
retorted. “I look into the office every few days. Short
hairs are soon combed.”</p>

<p>“And Strunck and Hagenström have all the business in
their hands anyhow,” the broker said morosely, with his
elbows sprawled out on the table and his wicked old grey
head in his hands.</p>

<p>“Oh, nothing can compete with a dung-heap, for smell,”
Döhlmann said, with a deliberately coarse pronunciation,
which must have depressed everybody’s spirits the more by
its hopeless cynicism. “Well, and you, Buddenbrook—what
are you doing now? Nothing, eh?”</p>

<p>“No,” answered Christian, “I can’t, any more.” And without
more ado, having perceived the mood of the hour, he
proceeded to accentuate it. He began, his hat on one side, to
talk about his Valparaiso office and Johnny Thunderstorm.
“Well, in that heat—‘Good God! Work, Sir? No, Sir. As
you see, Sir.’ And they puffed their cigarette-smoke right
in his face. Good God!” It was, as always, an incomparable
expression of dissolute, impudent, lazy good-nature.
His brother sat motionless.</p>

<p>Herr Gosch tried to lift his glass to his thin lips, put it
back on the table again, cursing through his shut teeth, and
struck the offending arm with his fist. Then he lifted the
glass once more, and spilled half its contents, draining
the remainder furiously at a gulp.</p>

<p>“Oh, you and your shaking, Gosch!” Peter Döhlmann exclaimed.
“Why don’t you just let yourself go, like me?
I’ll croak if I don’t drink my bottle every day—I’ve got as
far as that; and I’ll croak if I do. How would you feel if
you couldn’t get rid of your dinner, not a single day—I mean,
after you’ve got it in your stomach?” And he favoured
them with some repulsive details of his condition, to which
Christian listened with dreadful interest, wrinkling his nose
as far as it could go and countering with a brief and forcible
account of his “misery.”</p>

<p>It rained harder than ever. It came straight down in sheets
and filled the silence of the Kurgarden with its ceaseless,
forlorn, and desolate murmur.</p>

<p>“Yes, life’s pretty rotten,” said Senator Gieseke. He had
been drinking heavily.</p>

<p>“I’d just as lief quit,” said Christian.</p>

<p>“Let it go hang,” said Herr Gosch.</p>

<p>“There comes Fike Dahlbeck,” said Senator Gieseke. The
proprietress of the cow-stalls, a heavy, bold-faced woman
in the forties, came by with a pail of milk and smiled at
the gentlemen.</p>

<p>Senator Gieseke let his eyes rove after her.</p>

<p>“What a bosom,” he said. Consul Döhlmann added a lewd
witticism, with the result that all the gentlemen laughed once
more, through their noses.</p>

<p>The waiter was summoned.</p>

<p>“I’ve finished the bottle, Schröder,” said Consul Döhlmann.
“May as well pay—we have to some time or other. You,
Christian? Gieseke pays for you, eh?”</p>

<p>Senator Buddenbrook roused himself at this. He had been
sitting there, hardly speaking, wrapped in his cloak, his hands
in his lap and his cigarette in the corner of his mouth. Now
he suddenly started up and said sharply, “Have you no money
with you, Christian? Then I’ll lend it to you.”</p>

<p>They put up their umbrellas and emerged from their shelter
to take a little stroll.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder came out once in a while to see her
brother. They would walk as far as Sea-Gull Rock or the
little Ocean Temple; and here Tony Buddenbrook, for some
reason or other, was always seized by a mood of vague excitement
and rebellion. She would repeatedly emphasize the
independence and equality of all human beings, summarily
repudiate all distinctions of rank or class, use some very
strong language on the subject of privilege and arbitrary
power, and demand in set terms that merit should receive its
just reward. And then she talked about her own life. She
talked well, she entertained her brother capitally. This child
of fortune, so long as she walked upon this earth, had never
once needed to suppress an emotion, to choke down or swallow
anything she felt. She had never received in silence either the
blows or the caresses of fate. And whatever she had received,
of joy or sorrow, she had straightway given forth again, in a
flow of childish, self-important trivialities. Her digestion
was not perfect, it is true. But her heart—ah, her heart
was light, her spirit was free; freer than she herself comprehended.
She was not consumed by the inexpressible. No
sorrow weighed her down, or strove to speak but could not.
And thus it was that her past left no mark upon her. She
knew that she had led a troubled life—she knew it, that is, but
at bottom she never believed in it herself. She recognized it
as a fact, since everybody else believed it—and she utilized it
to her own advantage, talking of it and making herself great
with it in her own eyes and those of others. With outraged
virtue and dignity she would call by name all those persons
who had played havoc with her life and, in consequence, with
the prestige of the Buddenbrook family; the list had grown
long with time: Teary Trietschke! Grünlich! Permaneder!
Tiburtius! Weinschenk! the Hagenströms! the State Attorney!
Severin!—“What <i>filoux</i>, all of them, Thomas! God will
punish them—that is my firm belief.”</p>

<p>Twilight was falling as they came up to the Ocean Temple,
for the autumn was far advanced. They stood in one of
the little chambers facing the bay—it smelled of wood, like
the bathing cabins at the Kur, and its walls were scribbled
over with mottoes, initials, hearts and rhymes. They stood
and looked out over the dripping slope across the narrow,
stony strip of beach, out to the turbid, restless sea.</p>

<p>“Great waves,” said Thomas Buddenbrook. “How they
come on and break, come on and break, one after another,
endlessly, idly, empty and vast! And yet, like all the simple,
inevitable things, they soothe, they console, after all. I have
learned to love the sea more and more. Once, I think, I
cared more for the mountains—because they lay farther off.
Now I do not long for them. They would only frighten and
abash me. They are too capricious, too manifold, too
anomalous—I know I should feel myself vanquished in their
presence. What sort of men prefer the monotony of the sea?
Those, I think, who have looked so long and deeply into the
complexities of the spirit, that they ask of outward things
merely that they should possess one quality above all: simplicity.
It is true that in the mountains one clambers briskly
about, while beside the sea one sits quietly on the shore.
This is a difference, but a superficial one. The real difference
is in the look with which one pays homage to the one and
to the other. It is a strong, challenging gaze, full of enterprise,
that can soar from peak to peak; but the eyes that
rest on the wide ocean and are soothed by the sight of its
waves rolling on forever, mystically, relentlessly, are those
that are already wearied by looking too deep into the solemn
perplexities of life.—Health and illness, that is the difference.
The man whose strength is unexhausted climbs boldly up into
the lofty multiplicity of the mountain heights. But it is when
one is worn out with turning one’s eyes inward upon the bewildering
complexity of the human heart, that one finds
peace in resting them on the wideness of the sea.”</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder was silent and uncomfortable,—as simple
people are when a profound truth is suddenly expressed in
the middle of a conventional conversation. People don’t say
such things, she thought to herself; and looked out to sea so as
not to show her feeling by meeting his eyes. Then, in the
silence, to make amends for an embarrassment which she
could not help, she drew his arm through hers.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Winter</span> had come, Christmas had passed. It was January,
1875. The snow, which covered the foot-walks in a firm-trodden
mass, mingled with sand and ashes, was piled on
either side of the road in high mounds that were growing
greyer and more porous all the time, for the temperature was
rising. The pavements were wet and dirty, the grey gables
dripped. But above all stretched the heavens, a cloudless
tender blue, while millions of light atoms seemed to dance
like crystal motes in the air.</p>

<p>It was a lively sight in the centre of the town, for this was
Saturday, and market-day as well. Under the pointed arches
of the Town Hall arcades the butchers had their stalls and
weighed out their wares red-handed. The fish-market, however,
was held around the fountain in the market-square itself.
Here fat old women, with their hands in muffs from
which most of the fur was worn off, warming their feet at
little coal-braziers, guarded their slippery wares and tried
to cajole the servants and housewives into making purchases.
There was no fear of being cheated. The fish would certainly
be fresh, for the most of them were still alive. The luckiest
ones were even swimming about in pails of water, rather
cramped for space, but perfectly lively. Others lay with
dreadfully goggling eyes and labouring gills, clinging to life
and slapping the marble slab desperately with their tails—until
such time as their fate was at hand, when somebody
would seize them and cut their throats with a crunching
sound. Great fat eels writhed and wreathed about in extraordinary
shapes. There were deep vats full of black masses
of crabs from the Baltic. Once in a while a big flounder
gave such a desperate leap that he sprang right off his slab
and fell down upon the slippery pavement, among all the
refuse, and had to be picked up and severely admonished
by his possessor.</p>

<p>Broad Street, at midday, was full of life. Schoolchildren
with knapsacks on their backs came along the street, filling
it with laughter and chatter, snowballing each other with the
half-melting snow. Smart young apprentices passed, with
Danish sailor caps or suits cut after the English model, carrying
their portfolios and obviously pleased with themselves
for having escaped from school. Among the crowd were
settled, grey-bearded, highly respectable citizens, wearing the
most irreproachable national-liberal expression on their faces,
and tapping their sticks along the pavement. These looked
across with interest to the glazed-brick front of the Town
Hall, where the double guard was stationed; for the Senate
was in session. The sentries trod their beat, wearing their
cloaks, their guns on their shoulders, phlegmatically stamping
their feet in the dirty half-melted snow. They met in the
centre of their beat, looked at each other, exchanged a word,
turned, and moved away each to his own side. Sometimes a
lieutenant would pass, his coat-collar turned up, his hands in
his pockets, on the track of some grisette, yet at the same
time permitting himself to be admired by young ladies of
good family; and then each sentry would stand at attention
in front of his box, look at himself from head to foot, and
present arms. It would be a little time yet before they would
perform the same salute before the members of the Senate,
the sitting lasted some three quarters of an hour, it would
probably adjourn before that.</p>

<p>But one of the sentries suddenly heard a short, discreet
whistle from within the building. At the same moment the
entrance was illumined by the red uniform of Uhlefeldt
the beadle, with his dress sword and cocked hat. His air
of preoccupation was simply enormous as he uttered a stealthy
“Look out” and hastily withdrew. At the same moment approaching
steps were heard on the echoing flags within.</p>

<p>The sentries front-faced, inflated their chests, stiffened their
necks, grounded their arms, and then, with a couple of rapid
motions, presented arms. Between them there had appeared,
lifting his top-hat, a gentleman of scarcely medium height,
with one light eyebrow higher than the other and the pointed
ends of his moustaches extending beyond his pallid cheeks.
Senator Thomas Buddenbrook was leaving the Town Hall
to-day long before the end of the sitting. He did not take
the street to his own house, but turned to the right instead.
He looked correct, spotless, and elegant as, with the rather
hopping step peculiar to him, he walked along Broad Street,
constantly saluting people whom he met. He wore white
kid gloves, and he had his stick with the silver handle under
his left arm. A white dress tie peeped forth from between
the lapels of his fur coat. But his head and face, despite
their careful grooming, looked rather seedy. People who
passed him noticed that his eyes were watering and that he
held his mouth shut in a peculiar cautious way; it was twisted
a little to one side, and one could see by the muscles of his
cheeks and temples that he was clenching his jaw. Sometimes
he swallowed, as if a liquid kept rising in his mouth.</p>

<p>“Well, Buddenbrook, so you are cutting the session? That
is something new,” somebody said unexpectedly to him at
the beginning of Mill Street. It was his friend and admirer
Stephan Kistenmaker, whose opinion on all subjects was the
echo of his own. Stephan Kistenmaker had a full greying
beard, bushy eyebrows, and a long nose full of large pores.
He had retired from the wine business a few years back with
a comfortable sum, and his brother Eduard carried it on
by himself. He lived now the life of a private gentleman;
but, being rather ashamed of the fact, he always pretended to
be overwhelmed with work. “I’m wearing myself out,” he
would say, stroking his grey hair, which he curled with the
tongs. “But what’s a man good for, but to wear himself out?”
He stood hours on ’Change, gesturing imposingly, but doing no
business. He held a number of unimportant offices, the latest
one being Director of the city bathing establishments; but he
also functioned as juror, broker, and executor, and laboured
with such zeal that the perspiration dripped from his brow.</p>

<p>“There’s a session, isn’t there, Buddenbrook—and you are
taking a walk?”</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s you,” said the Senator in a low voice, moving his
lips cautiously. “I’m suffering frightfully—I’m nearly blind
with pain.”</p>

<p>“Pain? Where?”</p>

<p>“Toothache. Since yesterday. I did not close my eyes
last night. I have not been to the dentist yet, because I
had business in the office this morning, and then I did not
like to miss the sitting. But I couldn’t stand it any longer.
I’m on my way to Brecht.”</p>

<p>“Where is it?”</p>

<p>“Here on the left side, the lower jaw. A back tooth. It
is decayed, of course. The pain is simply unbearable. Good-bye,
Kistenmaker. You can understand that I am in a good
deal of a hurry.”</p>

<p>“Yes, of course—don’t you think I am, too? Awful lot
to do. Good-bye. Good luck! Have it out—get it over
with at once—always the best way.”</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook went on, biting his jaws together,
though it made the pain worse to do so. It was a furious
burning, boring pain, starting from the infected back tooth
and affecting the whole side of the jaw. The inflammation
throbbed like red-hot hammers; it made his face burn and
his eyes water. His nerves were terribly affected by the
sleepless night he had spent. He had had to control himself
just now, lest his voice break as he spoke.</p>

<p>He entered a yellow-brown house in Mill Street and went
up to the first storey, where a brass plate on the door said,
“Brecht, Dentist.” He did not see the servant who opened
the door. The corridor was warm and smelled of beefsteak
and cauliflower. Then he suddenly inhaled the sharp odour
of the waiting-room into which he was ushered. “Sit down!
One moment!” shrieked the voice of an old woman. It was
Josephus, who sat in his shining cage at the end of the room
and regarded him sidewise out of his venomous little eyes.</p>

<p>The Senator sat down at the round table and tried to read
the jokes in a volume of <i>Fliegende Blätter</i>, flung down the
book, and pressed the cool silver handle of his walking-stick
against his cheek. He closed his burning eyes and groaned.
There was not a sound, except for the noise made by Josephus
as he bit and clawed at the bars of his cage. Herr Brecht
might not be busy; but he owed it to himself to make his
patient wait a little.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook stood up precipitately and drank a
glass of water from the bottle on the table. It tasted and
smelled of chloroform. Then he opened the door into the
corridor and called out in an irritated voice: if there were
nothing very important to prevent it, would Herr Brecht kindly
make haste—he was suffering.</p>

<p>And immediately the bald forehead, hooked nose, and
grizzled moustaches of the dentist appeared in the door of the
operating-room. “If you please,” he said. “If you please,”
shrieked Josephus. The Senator followed on the invitation.
He was not smiling. “A bad case,” thought Herr Brecht, and
turned pale.</p>

<p>They passed through the large light room to the operating-chair
in front of one of the two largest windows. It was
an adjustable chair with an upholstered head-rest and green
plush arms. As he sat down, Thomas Buddenbrook briefly explained
what the trouble was. Then he leaned back his head
and closed his eyes.</p>

<p>Herr Brecht screwed up the chair a bit and got to work
on the tooth with a tiny mirror and a pointed steel instrument.
His hands smelled of almond soap, his breath of cauliflower
and beefsteak.</p>

<p>“We must proceed to extraction,” he said, after a while,
and turned still paler.</p>

<p>“Very well, proceed, then,” said the Senator, and shut his
eyes more tightly.</p>

<p>There was a pause. Herr Brecht prepared something at
his chest of drawers and got out his instruments. Then he
approached the chair again.</p>

<p>“I’ll paint it a little,” he said; and began at once to apply
a strong-smelling liquid in generous quantities. Then he
gently implored the patient to sit very still and open his
mouth very wide—and then he began.</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook clutched the plush arm-rests with
both his hands. He scarcely felt the forceps close around his
tooth; but from the grinding sensation in his mouth, and
the increasingly painful, really agonizing pressure on his
whole head, he was made amply aware that the thing was
under way. Thank God, he thought, now it can’t last long.
The pain grew and grew, to limitless, incredible heights; it
grew to an insane, shrieking, inhuman torture, tearing his
entire brain. It approached the catastrophe. ‘Here we are,
he thought. Now I must just bear it.’</p>

<p>It lasted three or four seconds. Herr Brecht’s nervous
exertions communicated themselves to Thomas Buddenbrook’s
whole body, he was even lifted up a little on his chair, and
he heard a soft, squeaking noise coming from the dentist’s
throat. Suddenly there was a fearful blow, a violent shaking
as if his neck were broken, accompanied by a quick
cracking, crackling noise. The pressure was gone, but his
head buzzed, the pain throbbed madly in the inflamed and
ill-used jaw; and he had the clearest impression that the thing
had not been successful: that the extraction of the tooth was
not the solution of the difficulty, but merely a premature catastrophe
which only made matters worse.</p>

<p>Herr Brecht had retreated. He was leaning against his
instrument-cupboard, and he looked like death. He said:
“The crown—I thought so.”</p>

<p>Thomas Buddenbrook spat a little blood into the blue
basin at his side, for the gum was lacerated. He asked, half-dazed:
“What did you think? What about the crown?”</p>

<p>“The crown broke off, Herr Senator. I was afraid of it.—The
tooth was in very bad condition. But it was my duty
to make the experiment.”</p>

<p>“What next?”</p>

<p>“Leave it to me, Herr Senator.”</p>

<p>“What will you have to do now?”</p>

<p>“Take out the roots. With a lever. There are four of
them.”</p>

<p>“Four. Then you must take hold and lift four times.”</p>

<p>“Yes—unfortunately.”</p>

<p>“Well, this is enough for to-day,” said the Senator. He
started to rise, but remained seated and put his head back
instead.</p>

<p>“My dear Sir, you mustn’t demand the impossible of
me,” he said. “I’m not very strong on my legs, just now.
I have had enough for to-day. Will you be so kind as to open
the window a little?”</p>

<p>Herr Brecht did so. “It will be perfectly agreeable to me,
Herr Senator, if you come in to-morrow or next day, at
whatever hour you like, and we can go on with the operation.
If you will permit me, I will just do a little more rinsing
and pencilling, to reduce the pain somewhat.”</p>

<p>He did the rinsing and pencilling, and then the Senator
went. Herr Brecht accompanied him to the door, pale as
death, expending his last remnant of strength in sympathetic
shoulder-shruggings.</p>

<p>“One moment, please!” shrieked Josephus as they passed
through the waiting-room. He still shrieked as Thomas Buddenbrook
went down the steps.</p>

<p>With a lever—yes, yes, that was to-morrow. What should
he do now? Go home and rest, sleep, if he could. The
actual pain in the nerve seemed deadened; in his mouth was
only a dull, heavy burning sensation. Home, then. He went
slowly through the streets, mechanically exchanging greetings
with those whom he met; his look was absent and wandering,
as though he were absorbed in thinking how he felt.</p>

<p>He got as far as Fishers’ Lane and began to descend the
left-hand sidewalk. After twenty paces he felt nauseated.
“I’ll go over to the public-house and take a drink of brandy,”
he thought, and began to cross the road. But just as he
reached the middle, something happened to him. It was
precisely as if his brain was seized and swung around, faster
and faster, in circles that grew smaller and smaller, until it
crashed with enormous, brutal, pitiless force against a stony
centre. He performed a half-turn, fell, and struck the wet
pavement, his arms outstretched.</p>

<p>As the street ran steeply downhill, his body lay much
lower than his feet. He fell upon his face, beneath which,
presently, a little pool of blood began to form. His hat
rolled a little way off down the road; his fur coat was wet
with mud and slush; his hands, in their white kid gloves, lay
outstretched in a puddle.</p>

<p>Thus he lay, and thus he remained, until some people
came down the street and turned him over.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER VIII</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Frau Permaneder</span> mounted the main staircase, holding up
her gown in front of her with one hand and with the other
pressing her muff to her cheek. She tripped and stumbled
more than she walked; her cheeks were flushed, her capote
sat crooked on her head, and little beads stood on her upper
lip.... Though she met no one, she talked continually as
she hurried up, in whispers out of which now and then a
word rose clear and audible and emphasized her fear. “It’s
nothing,” she said. “It doesn’t mean anything. God wouldn’t
let anything happen. He knows what he’s doing, I’m very
sure of that.... Oh, my God, I’ll pray every day—” She
prattled senselessly in her fear, as she rushed up to the second
storey and down the corridor.</p>

<p>The door of the ante-chamber opened, and her sister-in-law
came toward her. Gerda Buddenbrook’s lovely white
face was quite distorted with horror and disgust; and her
close-set, blue-shadowed brown eyes opened and shut with a
look of anger, distraction, and shrinking. As she recognized
Frau Permaneder, she beckoned quickly with outstretched
arms and embraced her, putting her head on her sister-in-law’s
shoulder.</p>

<p>“Gerda! Gerda! What is it?” Frau Permaneder cried.
“What has happened? What does it mean? They said he
fell—unconscious? How is he?—God won’t let the worst
happen, I know. Tell me, for pity’s sake!”</p>

<p>But the reply did not come at once. She only felt how
Gerda’s whole form was shaken. Then she heard a whisper
at her shoulder.</p>

<p>“How he looked,” she heard, “when they brought him!
His whole life long, he never let any one see even a speck
of dust on him.—Oh, it is insulting, it is vile, for the end
to have come like that!”</p>

<p>Subdued voices came out to them. The dressing-room
door opened, and Ida Jungmann stood in the doorway in
a white apron, a basin in her hands. Her eyes were red.
She looked at Frau Permaneder and made way, her head
bent. Her chin was trembling.</p>

<p>The high flowered curtains stirred in the draught as Tony,
followed by her sister-in-law, entered the chamber. The
smell of carbolic, ether, and other drugs met them. In the
wide mahogany bed, under the red down coverlet, lay Thomas
Buddenbrook, on his back, undressed and clad in an embroidered
nightshirt. His half-open eyes were rolled up;
his lips were moving under the disordered moustaches, and
babbling, gurgling sounds came out. Young Dr. Langhals
was bending over him, changing a bloody bandage for a
fresh one, which he dipped into a basin at the bedside. Then
he listened at the patient’s chest and felt his pulse.</p>

<p>On the bed-clothes at the foot of the bed sat little Johann,
clutching his sailor’s knot and listening broodingly to the
sounds behind him, which his father was making. The Senator’s
bemired clothing hung over a chair.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder cowered down at the bedside, seized one
of her brother’s hands—it was cold and heavy—and stared
wildly into his face. She began to understand that, whether
God knew what he was doing or not, he was at all events bent
on “the worst”!</p>

<p>“Tom!” she clamoured, “do you know me? How are you?
You aren’t going to leave us? You won’t go away from us?
Oh, it <i>can’t</i> be!”</p>

<p>Nothing answered her, that could be called an answer.
She looked imploringly up at Dr. Langhals. He stood there
with his beautiful eyes cast down; and his manner, not without
a certain self-satisfaction, expressed the will of God.</p>

<p>Ida Jungmann came back into the room, to make herself
useful if she could. Old Dr. Grabow appeared in person,
looked at the patient with his long, mild face, shook his
head, pressed all their hands, and then stood as Dr. Langhals
stood. The news had gone like the wind through the whole
town. The vestibule door rang constantly, and inquiries after
the Senator’s condition came up into the sick-chamber. It
was unchanged—unchanged. Every one received the same
answer.</p>

<p>The two physicians were in favour of sending for a sister
of charity—at least for the night. They sent for Sister
Leandra, and she came. There was no trace of surprise or
alarm in her face as she entered. Again she laid aside her
leather bag, her outer hood and cloak, and again she set to
work in her gentle way.</p>

<p>Little Johann sat hour after hour on the bed-clothes, watching
everything and listening to the gurgling noises. He was
to have gone to an arithmetic lesson; but he understood
perfectly that what was happening here was something over
which the worsted-coats had no jurisdiction. He thought
of his lessons only for a moment, and with scorn. He wept,
sometimes, when Frau Permaneder came up and pressed him
to her; but mostly he sat dry-eyed, with a shrinking, brooding
gaze, and his breath came irregularly and cautiously, as if he
expected any moment to smell that strange and yet familiar
smell.</p>

<p>Toward four o’clock Frau Permaneder took a sudden resolve.
She asked Dr. Langhals to come with her into the
next room; and there she folded her arms and laid back her
head, with the chin dropped.</p>

<p>“Herr Doctor,” she said, “there is one thing you can do,
and I beg you to do it. Tell me the truth. I am a woman
steeled by adversity; I have learned to bear the truth. You
may depend upon me. Please tell me plainly: Will my
brother be alive to-morrow?”</p>

<p>Dr. Langhals turned his beautiful eyes aside, looked at
his fingernails, and spoke of our human powerlessness, and
the impossibility of knowing whether Frau Permaneder’s
brother would outlive the night, or whether he would be
called away the next minute.</p>

<p>“Then I know what I have to do,” said she; went out of
the room; and sent for Pastor Pringsheim.</p>

<p>Pastor Pringsheim appeared, without his vestments or neck-ruff,
in a long black gown. He swept Sister Leandra with
an icy stare, and seated himself in the chair which they
placed for him by the bedside. He asked the patient to
recognize and hear him. Then, as this appeal was unsuccessful,
he addressed himself at once to God and prayed
in carefully modulated tones, with his Frankish pronunciation,
with emphasis now solemn and now abrupt, while waves
of fanaticism and sanctimony followed each other across
his face. He pronounced his <i>r</i> in a sleek and oily way
peculiar to himself alone, and little Johann received an irresistible
impression that he had just been eating rolls and
coffee.</p>

<p>He said that he and the family there present no longer
importuned God for the life of this dear and beloved sufferer,
for they saw plainly that it was God’s will to take him
to Himself. They only begged Him for the mercy of a gentle
death. And then he recited, appropriately and with effect,
two of the prayers customary on such occasions. Then he
got up. He pressed Gerda Buddenbrook’s hand, and Frau
Permaneder’s, and held little Johann’s head for a moment between
both his hands, regarding the drooping eyelashes with
an expression of the most fervent pity. He saluted Ida
Jungmann, stared again at Sister Leandra, and took his leave.</p>

<p>Dr. Langhals had gone home for a little. When he came
back there had been no change. He spoke with the nurse,
and went again. Dr. Grabow came once more, to see that
everything was being done. Thomas Buddenbrook went on
babbling and gurgling, with his eyes rolled up. Twilight
was falling. There was a pale winter glow at sunset, and it
shone through the window upon the soiled clothing lying
across the chair.</p>

<p>At five o’clock Frau Permaneder let herself be carried
away by her feelings, and committed an indiscretion. She
suddenly began to sing, in her throaty voice, her hands
folded before her.</p>

<p class="center">“Come, Lord,”</p>

<p>she sang, quite loud, and they all listened without stirring.</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“Come, Lord, receive his failing breath;</div>
<div class="verse">Strengthen his hands and feet, and lead him unto death.”</div>
</div></div>

<p>But in the devoutness of her prayer, she thought only of the
words as they welled up from her heart, and forgot that she
did not know the whole stanza; after the third line she was
left hanging in the air, and had to make up for her abrupt end
by the increased dignity of her manner. Everybody shivered
with embarrassment. Little Johann coughed so hard that the
coughs sounded like sobs. And then, in the sudden pause,
there was no sound but the agonizing gurgles of Thomas
Buddenbrook.</p>

<p>It was a relief when the servant announced that there was
something to eat in the next room. But they had only begun,
sitting in Gerda’s bedroom, to take a little soup, when
Sister Leandra appeared in the doorway and quietly beckoned.</p>

<p>The Senator was dying. He hiccoughed gently two or
three times, was silent, and ceased to move his lips. That
was the only change. His eyes had been quite dead before.</p>

<p>Dr. Langhals, who was on the spot a few minutes later,
put the black stethoscope to the heart, listened, and, after
this scientific test, said “Yes, it is over.”</p>

<p>And Sister Leandra, with the forefinger of her gentle
white hand, softly closed the eyes of the dead.</p>

<p>Then Frau Permaneder flung herself down on her knees
by the bed, pressed her face into the coverlet, and wept
aloud, surrendering herself utterly and without restraint to
one of those refreshing bursts of feeling which her happy
nature had always at its command. Her face still streamed
with tears, but she was soothed and comforted and entirely
herself as she rose to her feet and began straightway to occupy
her mind with the announcements of the death—an enormous
number of elegant cards, which must be ordered at once.</p>

<p>Christian appeared. He had heard the news of the Senator’s
stroke in the club, which he had left at once. But he
was so afraid of seeing some awful sight that he went instead
for a long walk outside the walls, and was not to be found.
Now, however, he came in, and on the threshold heard of
his brother’s death.</p>

<p>“It isn’t possible,” he said, and limped up the stairs, his
eyes rolling wildly.</p>

<p>He stood at the bedside between his sister and his sister-in-law;
with his bald head, his sunken cheeks, his drooping
moustaches, and his huge beaked nose, he stood there on his
bent legs, looking a little like an interrogation-point, and
gazed with his little round deep eyes into his brother’s face,
as it lay so silent, so cold, so detached and inaccessible. The
corners of Thomas’s mouth were drawn down in an expression
almost scornful. Here he lay, at whom once Christian
had flung the reproach that he was too heartless to weep at a
brother’s death. He was dead now himself: he had simply
withdrawn, silent, elegant, and irreproachable, into the hereafter.
He had, as so often in his life, left it to others to feel
put in the wrong. No matter now, whether he had been right
or wrong in his cold and scornful indifference toward his
brother’s afflictions, the “misery,” the nodding man, the spirit-bottle,
the open window. None of that mattered now; for
death, with arbitrary and incomprehensible partiality, had
singled him out, and taken him up, and given him an awesome
dignity and importance. And yet Death had rejected
Christian, had held him off, and would not have him at any
price—would only keep on making game of him and mocking
him with all these tricks and antics which nobody took seriously.
Never in his life had Thomas Buddenbrook so impressed
his brother as at this hour. Success is so definite,
so conclusive! Death alone can make others respect our
sufferings; and through death the most pitiable sufferings
acquire dignity. “You have won—I give in,” Christian
thought. He knelt on one knee, with a sudden awkward
gesture, and kissed the cold hand on the coverlet. Then he
stepped back and moved about the room, his eyes darting
back and forth.</p>

<p>Other visitors came—the old Krögers, the Misses Buddenbrook,
old Herr Marcus. Poor Clothilde, lean and ashen,
stood by the bed; her face was apathetic, and she folded her
hands in their worsted gloves. “You must not think, Tony
and Gerda,” said she, and her voice dragged very much,
“that I’ve no feeling because I don’t weep. The truth is, I
have no more tears.” And as she stood there, incredibly dry
and withered, it was evident that she spoke the truth.</p>

<p>Then they all left the room to make way for an elderly
female, an unpleasant old creature with a toothless, mumbling
jaw, who had come to help Sister Leandra wash and dress
the corpse.</p>

<p>Gerda Buddenbrook, Frau Permaneder, Christian, and little
Johann sat under the big gas-lamp around the centre-table
in the living-room, and worked industriously until far on
into the evening. They were addressing envelopes and making
a list of people who ought to receive announcements.
Now and then somebody thought of another name. Hanno
had to help, too; his handwriting was plain, and there was
need of haste.</p>

<p>It was still in the house and in the street. The gas-lamp
made a soft hissing noise; somebody murmured a name; the
papers rustled. Sometimes they looked at each other and
remembered what had happened.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder scratched busily. But regularly once
every five minutes she would put down her pen, lift her
clasped hands up to her mouth, and break out in lamentations.
“I can’t realize it!” she would cry—meaning that she was
gradually beginning to realize. “It is the end of everything,”
she burst out another time, in sheer despair, and flung her
arms around her sister-in-law’s neck with loud weeping.
After each outburst she was strengthened, and took up her
work again.</p>

<p>With Christian it was as with poor Clothilde. He had not
shed a tear—which fact rather mortified him. It was true,
too, that his constant preoccupation with his own condition
had used him up emotionally and made him insensitive. Now
and then he would start up, rub his hand over his bald brow,
and murmur, “Yes, it’s frightfully sad.” He said it to himself,
with strong self-reproach, and did his best to make his
eyes water.</p>

<p>Suddenly something happened to startle them all: little
Johann began to laugh. He was copying a list of names, and
had found one with such a funny sound that he could not
resist it. He said it aloud and snorted through his nose,
bent over, sobbed, and could not control himself. The grown
people looked at him in bewildered incredulity; and his
mother sent him up to bed.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IX</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Senator Buddenbrook</span> had died of a bad tooth. So it was
said in the town. But goodness, people don’t die of a bad
tooth! He had had a toothache; Herr Brecht had broken off
the crown; and thereupon the Senator had simply fallen in
the street. Was ever the like heard?</p>

<p>But however it had happened, that was no longer the
point. What had next to be done was to send wreaths—large,
expensive wreaths which would do the givers credit
and be mentioned in the paper: wreaths which showed that
they came from people with sympathetic hearts and long
purses. They were sent. They poured in from all sides,
from organizations, from families and individuals: laurel
wreaths, wreaths of heavily-scented flowers, silver wreaths,
wreaths with black bows or bows with the colours of the City
on them, or dedications printed in heavy black type or gilt
lettering. And palms—simply quantities of palms.</p>

<p>The flower-shops did an enormous business, not least among
them being Iwersen’s, opposite the Buddenbrook mansion.
Frau Iwersen rang many times in the day at the vestibule
door, and handed in arrangements in all shapes and styles,
from Senator This or That, or Consul So-and-So, from office
staffs and civil servants. On one of these visits she asked if
she might go up and see the Senator a minute. Yes, of
course, she was told; and she followed Frau Permaneder up
the main staircase, gazing silently at its magnificence.</p>

<p>She went up heavily, for she was, as usual, expecting.
Her looks had grown a little common with the years; but the
narrow black eyes and the Malay cheek-bones had not lost
their charm. One could still see that she must once have
been exceedingly pretty. She was admitted into the salon,
where Thomas Buddenbrook lay upon his bier.</p>

<p>He lay in the centre of the large, light room, the furniture
of which had been removed, amid the white silk linings of
his coffin, dressed in white silk, shrouded in white silk, in a
thick and stupefying mingling of odours from the tube-roses,
violets, roses, and other flowers with which he was
surrounded. At his head, in a half-circle of silver candelabra,
stood the pedestal draped in mourning, supporting
the marble copy of Thorwaldsen’s Christ. The wreaths, garlands,
baskets, and bunches stood or lay along the walls, on
the floor, and on the coverlet. Palms stood around the bier
and drooped over the feet of the dead. The skin of his face
was abraded in spots, and the nose was bruised. But his hair
was dressed with the tongs, as in life, and his moustache,
too, had been drawn through the tongs for the last time by
old Herr Wenzel, and stuck out stiff and straight beyond his
white cheeks. His head was turned a little to one side, and
an ivory cross was stuck between the folded hands.</p>

<p>Frau Iwersen remained near the door, and looked thence,
blinking, over to the bier. Only when Frau Permaneder, in
deep black, with a cold in her head from much weeping, came
from the living-room through the portières and invited Frau
Iwersen to come nearer, did she dare to venture a little farther
forward on the parquetry floor. She stood with her hands
folded across her prominent abdomen, and looked about her
with her narrow black eyes: at the plants, the candelabra,
the bows and the wreaths, the white silk, and Thomas Buddenbrook’s
face. It would be hard to describe the expression
on the pale, blurred features of the pregnant woman.
Finally she said “Yes—” sobbed just once, a brief confused
sound, and turned away.</p>

<p>Frau Permaneder loved these visits. She never stirred
from the house, but superintended with tireless zeal the
homage that pressed about the earthly husk of her departed
brother. She read the newspaper articles aloud many times
in her throaty voice: those same newspapers which at the
time of the jubilee had paid tribute to her brother’s merits,
now mourned the irreparable loss of his personality. She
stood at Gerda’s side to receive the visits of condolence in the
living-room and there was no end of these; their name was
legion. She held conferences with various people about the
funeral, which must of course be conducted in the most refined
manner. She arranged farewells: she had the office staff
come in a body to bid their chief good-bye. The workmen
from the granaries came too. They shuffled their huge feet
along the parquetry floor, drew down the corners of their
mouths to show their respect, and emanated an odour of
chewing tobacco, spirits, and physical exertion. They looked
at the dead lying in his splendid state, twirled their caps,
first admired and then grew restive, until at length one of
them found courage to go, and the whole troop followed
shuffling on his heels. Frau Permaneder was enchanted. She
asserted that some of them had tears running down into
their beards. This simply was not the fact; but she saw it,
and it made her happy.</p>

<p>The day of the funeral dawned. The metal casket was
hermetically sealed and covered with flowers, the candles
burned in their silver holders, the house filled with people,
and, surrounded by mourners from near and far, Pastor
Pringsheim stood at the head of the coffin in upright majesty,
his impressive head resting upon his ruff as on a dish.</p>

<p>A high-shouldered functionary, a brisk intermediate something
between a waiter and a major-domo, had in charge the
outward ordering of the solemnity. He ran with the softest
speed down the staircase and called in a penetrating whisper
across the entry, which was filled to overflowing with tax-commissioners
in uniform and grain-porters in blouses, knee-breeches,
and tall hats: “The rooms are full, but there is
a little room left in the corridor.”</p>

<p>Then everything was hushed. Pastor Pringsheim began
to speak. He filled the whole house with the rolling periods
of his exquisitely modulated, sonorous voice. He stood there
near the figure of Thorwaldsen’s Christ and wrung his hands
before his face or spread them out in blessing; while below
in the street, before the house door, beneath a white wintry
sky, stood the hearse drawn by four black horses, with the
other carriages in a long row behind it. A company of
soldiers with grounded arms stood in two rows opposite the
house door, with Lieutenant von Throta at their head. He
held his drawn sword on his arm and looked up at the bow-window
with his brilliant eyes. Many people were craning
their necks from windows nearby or standing on the pavements
to look.</p>

<p>At length there was a stir in the vestibule, the lieutenant’s
muffled word of command sounded, the soldiers presented
arms with a rattle of weapons, Herr von Throta let his sword
sink, and the coffin appeared. It swayed cautiously forth of
the house door, borne by the four men in black cloaks and
cocked hats, and a gust of perfume came with it, wafted over
the heads of bystanders. The breeze ruffled the black plumes
on top of the hearse, tossed the manes of the horses standing
in line down to the river, and dishevelled the mourning
hat-scarves of the coachmen and grooms. Enormous single
flakes of snow drifted down from the sky in long slanting
curves.</p>

<p>The horses attached to the hearse, all in black trappings
so that only their restless rolling eyeballs could be seen,
now slowly got in motion. The hearse moved off, led by
the four black servants. The company of soldiers fell in behind,
and one after another the coaches followed on.
Christian Buddenbrook and the pastor got into the first; little
Johann sat in the second, with a well-fed Hamburg relative.
And slowly, slowly, with mournful long-drawn pomp, Thomas
Buddenbrook’s funeral train wound away, while the flags
at half-mast on all the houses flapped before the wind. The
office staff and the grain-porters followed on foot.</p>

<p>The casket, with the mourners behind, followed the well-known
cemetery paths, past crosses and statues and chapels
and bare weeping-willows, to the Buddenbrook family lot,
where the military guard of honour already stood, and presented
arms again. A funeral march sounded in subdued
and solemn strains from behind the shrubbery.</p>

<p>Once more the heavy gravestone, with the family arms in
relief, had been moved to one side; and once more the gentlemen
of the town stood there, on the edge of the little grove,
beside the abyss walled in with masonry into which Thomas
Buddenbrook was now lowered to join his fathers. They
stood there with bent heads, these worthy and well-to-do
citizens: prominent among them were the Senators, in white
gloves and cravats. Beyond them was the throng of officials,
clerks, grain-porters, and warehouse labourers.</p>

<p>The music stopped. Pastor Pringsheim spoke. While his
voice, raised in blessing, still lingered on the air, everybody
pressed round to shake hands with the brother and son of the
deceased.</p>

<p>The ceremony was long and tedious. Christian Buddenbrook
received all the condolences with his usual absent,
embarrassed air. Little Johann stood by his side, in his
heavy reefer jacket with the gilt buttons, and looked at the
ground with his blue-shadowed eyes. He never looked up,
but bent his head against the wind with a sensitive twist of
all his features.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h2 class="nobreak">PART ELEVEN</h2>
</div>

<p></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">

<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER I</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">It</span> sometimes happens that we may recall this or that person
whom we have not lately seen and wonder how he is. And
then, with a start, we remember that he has disappeared from
the stage, that his voice no longer swells the general concert—that
he is, in short, departed from among us, and lies somewhere
outside the walls, beneath the sod.</p>

<p>Frau Consul Buddenbrook, she that was a Stüwing, Uncle
Gotthold’s widow, passed away. Death set his reconciling and
atoning seal upon the brow of her who in her life had been
the cause of such violent discord; and her three daughters,
Friederike, Henriette, and Pfiffi, received the condolences of
their relatives with an affronted air which seemed to say:
“You see, your persecutions have at last brought her down
to her grave!” As if the Frau Consul were not as old as
the hills already!</p>

<p>And Madame Kethelsen had gone to her long rest. In her
later years she had suffered much from gout; but she died
gently and simply, resting upon a childlike faith which was
much envied by her educated sister, who had always had her
periodic attacks of rationalistic doubt, and who, though she
grew constantly smaller and more bent, was relentlessly bound
by an iron constitution to this sinful earth.</p>

<p>Consul Peter Döhlmann was called away. He had eaten
up all his money, and finally fell a prey to Hunyadi-Janos,
leaving his daughter an income of two hundred marks a year.
He depended upon the respect felt in the community for the
name of Döhlmann to insure her being admitted into the
Order of St. John.</p>

<p>Justus Kröger also departed this life, which was a loss,
for now nobody was left to prevent his wife selling everything
she owned to send money to the wretched Jacob, who
was still leading a dissolute existence somewhere in the world.</p>

<p>Christian Buddenbrook had likewise disappeared from the
streets of his native city. He would have been sought in
vain within her walls. He had moved to Hamburg, less than
a year after his brother’s death, and there he united himself,
before God and men, with Fräulein Aline Puvogel, a lady
with whom he had long stood in a close relationship. No
one could now stop him. His inheritance from his mother, indeed,
half the interest of which had always found its way to
Hamburg, was managed by Herr Stephan Kistenmaker—in
so far as it was not already spent in advance. Herr Kistenmaker,
in fact, had been appointed administrator by the
terms of his deceased friend’s will. But in all other respects
Christian was his own master. Directly the marriage
became known, Frau Permaneder addressed to Frau Aline
Buddenbrook in Hamburg a long and extraordinarily violent
letter, beginning “Madame!” and declaring in carefully
poisoned words that she had absolutely no intention of recognizing
as a relative either the person addressed or any of her
children.</p>

<p>Herr Kistenmaker was executor and administrator of the
Buddenbrook estate and guardian of little Johann. He held
these offices in high regard. They were an important activity
which justified him in rubbing his head on the Bourse with
every indication of overwork and telling everybody that
he was simply wearing himself out. Besides, he received
two per cent. of the revenues, very punctually. But he was
not too successful in the performance of his duties, and
Gerda Buddenbrook soon had reason to feel dissatisfied.</p>

<p>The business was to close, the firm to go into liquidation,
and the estate to be settled within a year. This was Thomas
Buddenbrook’s wish, as expressed in his will. Frau Permaneder
felt much upset. “And Hanno? And little Johann—what
about Hanno?” She was disappointed and grieved
that her brother had passed over his son and heir and had not
wished to keep the firm alive for him to step into. She wept
for hours to think that one should dispose thus summarily
of that honourable shield, that jewel cherished by four
generations of Buddenbrooks: that the history of the firm was
now to close, while yet there existed a direct heir to carry
it on. But she finally consoled herself by thinking that the
end of the firm was not, after all, the end of the family, and
that her nephew might as easily, in a new and different career,
perform the high task allotted to him—that task being to
carry on the family name and add fresh lustre to the family
reputation. It could not be in vain that he possessed so
much likeness to his great-grandfather.</p>

<p>The liquidation of the business began, under the auspices
of Herr Kistenmaker and old Herr Marcus; and it took a
most deplorable course. The time was short, and it must
be punctiliously kept to. The pending business was disposed
of on hurried and unfavourable terms. One precipitate
and disadvantageous sale followed another. The granaries
and warehouses were turned into money at a great loss; and
what was not lost by Herr Kistenmaker’s over-zealousness
was wasted by the procrastination of old Herr Marcus. In
town they said that the old man, before he left his house
in winter warmed not only his coat and hat, but his walking-stick
as well. If ever a favourable opportunity arose, he
invariably let it slip through his fingers. And so the losses
piled up. Thomas Buddenbrook had left, on paper, an
estate of six hundred and fifty thousand marks. A year
after the will was opened it had become abundantly clear that
there was no question of such a sum.</p>

<p>Indefinite, exaggerated rumours of the unfavourable liquidation
got about, and were fed by the news that Gerda
Buddenbrook meant to sell the great house. Wonderful
stories flew about, of the reasons which obliged her to take
such a step; of the collapse of the Buddenbrook fortune.
Things were thought to look very badly: and a feeling began
to grow up in the town, of which the widowed Frau Senator
became aware, at first with surprise and astonishment, and then
with growing anger. When she told her sister-in-law, one
day, that she had been pressed in an unpleasant way for the
payment of some considerable accounts, Frau Permaneder
had at first been speechless, and then had burst out into
frightful laughter. Gerda Buddenbrook was so outraged
that she expressed a half-determination to leave the city for
ever with little Johann and go back to Amsterdam to play
duets with her old father. But this called forth such a storm
of protest from Frau Permaneder that she was obliged to
give up the plan for the time being.</p>

<p>As was to be expected, Frau Permaneder protested against
the sale of the house which her brother had built. She bewailed
the bad impression it would make and complained of
the blow it would deal the family prestige. But she had to
grant that it would be folly to continue to keep up the spacious
and splendid dwelling that had been Thomas Buddenbrook’s
costly hobby, and that Gerda’s idea of a comfortable
little villa outside the wall, in the country, had, after all,
much to commend it.</p>

<p>A great day dawned for Siegismund Gosch the broker. His
old age was illumined by an event so stupendous that for
many hours it held his knees from trembling. It came about
that he sat in Gerda Buddenbrook’s salon, in an easy-chair,
opposite her and discussed tête-à-tête the price of her house.
His snow-white locks streamed over his face, his chin protruded
grimly, he succeeded for once in looking thoroughly
hump-backed. He hissed when he talked, but his manners
were cold and businesslike, and nothing betrayed the emotions
of his soul. He bound himself to take over the house,
stretched out his hand, smiled cunningly, and bid eighty-five
thousand marks—which was a possible offer, for some loss
would certainly have to be taken in this sale. But Herr Kistenmaker’s
opinion must be heard; and Gerda Buddenbrook
had to let Herr Gosch go without making the bargain. Then
it appeared that Herr Kistenmaker was not minded to allow
any interference in what he considered his prerogative. He
mistrusted Herr Gosch’s offer; he laughed at it, and swore
that he could easily get much more. He continued to swear
this, until at length he was forced to dispose of the property
for seventy-five thousand marks to an elderly spinster who
had returned from extended travel and decided to settle in
the town.</p>

<p>Herr Kistenmaker also arranged for the purchase of the
new house, a pleasant little villa for which he paid rather
too high a price, but which was about what Gerda Buddenbrook
wanted. It lay outside the Castle Gate, on a chestnut-bordered
avenue; and thither, in the autumn of the year 1876,
the Frau Senator moved with her son, her servants, and a part
of her household goods—the remainder, to Frau Permaneder’s
great distress, being left behind to pass into the possession
of the elderly gentlewoman.</p>

<p>As if these were not changes enough, Mamsell Jungmann,
after forty years in the service of the Buddenbrook family,
left it to return to her native West Prussia to live out the
evening of her life. To tell the truth, she was dismissed by
the Frau Senator. This good soul had taken up with little
Johann when the previous generation had outgrown her. She
had cherished him fondly, read him fairy stories, and told
him about the uncle who died of hiccoughs. But now little
Johann was no longer small. He was a lad of fifteen years,
to whom, despite his lack of strength, she could no longer
be of much service; and with his mother her relations had not
for a long time been on a very comfortable footing. She
had never been able to think of this lady, who had entered
the family so much later than herself, as a proper Buddenbrook;
and of late she had begun, with the freedom of an old
servant, to arrogate to herself exaggerated authority. She
stirred up dissension in the household by this or that encroachment;
the position became untenable; there were disagreements—and
though Frau Permaneder made an impassioned
plea in her behalf, as for the old house and the
furniture, old Ida had to go.</p>

<p>She wept bitterly when the hour came to bid little Johann
farewell. He put his arms about her and embraced her.
Then, with his hands behind his back, resting his weight on
one leg while the other poised on the tips of the toes, he
watched her out of sight; his face wore the same brooding,
introspective look with which he had stood at his father’s
death-bed, and his grandmother’s bier, witnessed the breaking-up
of the great household, and shared in so many events
of the same kind, though of lesser outward significance. The
departure of old Ida belonged to the same category as other
events with which he was already familiar: breakings-up, closings,
endings, disintegrations—he had seen them all. Such
events did not disturb him—they had never disturbed him.
But he would lift his head, with the curling light-brown
hair, inflate one delicate nostril, and it was as if he cautiously
sniffed the air about him, expecting to perceive that
odour, that strange and yet familiar odour which, at his grandmother’s
bier, not all the scent of the flowers had been able
to disguise.</p>

<p>When Frau Permaneder visited her sister-in-law, she would
draw her nephew to her and tell him of the Buddenbrook
family past, and of that future for which, next to the mercy
of God, they would have to thank little Johann. The more
depressing the present appeared, the more she strove to depict
the elegance of the life that went on in the houses of
her parents and grandparents; and she would tell Hanno
how his great-grandfather had driven all over the country
with his carriage and four horses. One day she had a severe
attack of cramps in the stomach because Friederike, Henriette,
and Pfiffi had asserted that the Hagenströms were the crême
de la crême of town society.</p>

<p>Bad news came of Christian. His marriage seemed not
to have improved his health. He had become more and
more subject to uncanny delusions and morbid hallucinations,
until finally his wife had acted upon the advice of a
physician and had him put into an institution. He was unhappy
there, and wrote pathetic letters to his relatives, expressive
of a fervent desire to leave the establishment, where,
it seemed, he was none too well treated. But they kept him
shut up, and it was probably the best thing for him. It also
put his wife in a position to continue her former independent
existence without prejudice to her status as a married woman
or to the practical advantages accruing from her marriage.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER II</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">The</span> alarm-clock went off with cruel alacrity. It was a hoarse
rattling and clattering that it made, rather than a ringing,
for it was old and worn out; but it kept on for a painfully
long time, for it had been thoroughly wound up.</p>

<p>Hanno Buddenbrook was startled to his inmost depths.
It was like this every morning. His very entrails rebelled,
in rage, protest, and despair, at the onslaught of this at
once cruel and faithful monitor standing on the bedside table
close to his ear. However, he did not get up, or even change
his position in the bed; he only wrenched himself away
from some blurred dream of the early morning and opened
his eyes.</p>

<p>It was perfectly dark in the wintry room. He could distinguish
nothing, not even the hands on the clock. But he
knew it was six o’clock, because last night he had set his
alarm for six. Last night— And as he lay on his back, with
his nerves rasped by the shock of waking, struggling for
sufficient resolution to make a light and jump out of bed,
everything that had filled his mind yesterday came gradually
back into his consciousness.</p>

<p>It was Sunday evening; and after having been maltreated
by Herr Brecht for several days on end, he had been taken
as a reward to a performance of <i>Lohengrin</i>. He had looked
forward for a whole week to this evening with a joy which
absorbed his entire existence. Only, it was a pity that on
such occasions the full pleasure of the anticipation had to be
marred by disagreeable commonplaces that went on up to
the very last minute. But at length Saturday came, school
was over for the week, and Herr Brecht’s little drill had
bored and buzzed away in the mouth for the last time. Now
everything was out of the way and done with—for he had obstinately
put off his preparation for Monday until after the
opera. What was Monday to him? Was it likely it would
ever dawn? Who believes in Monday, when he is to hear
<i>Lohengrin</i> on Sunday evening? He would get up early on
Monday and get the wretched stuff done—and that was all
there was to it. Thus he went about free from care, fondled
the coming joy in his heart, dreamed at his piano, and forgot
all unpleasantness to come.</p>

<p>And then the dream became reality. It came over him
with all its enchantment and consecration, all its secret revelations
and tremors, its sudden inner emotion, its extravagant,
unquenchable intoxication. It was true that the music of
the overture was rather too much for the cheap violins in the
orchestra; and the fat conceited-looking Lohengrin with straw-coloured
hair came in rather hind side foremost in his little
boat. And his guardian, Herr Stephan Kistenmaker, had sat
in the next box and grumbled about the boy’s being taken
away from his lessons and having his mind distracted like
that. But the sweet, exalted splendour of the music had
borne him away upon its wings.</p>

<p>The end had come at length. The singing, shimmering joy
was quenched and silent. He had found himself back home
in his room, with a burning head and the consciousness that
only a few hours of sleep, there in his bed, separated him
from dull everyday existence. And he had been overpowered
by an attack of the complete despondency which was all too
familiar an experience. Again he had learned that beauty
can pierce one like a pain, and that it can sink profoundly
into shame and a longing despair that utterly consume the
courage and energy necessary to the life of every day. His
despondency weighed him down like mountains, and once more
he told himself, as he had done before, that this was more
than his own individual burden of weaknesses that rested
upon him: that his burden was one which he had borne upon
his soul from the beginning of time, and must one day sink
under at last.</p>

<p>He had wound the alarm-clock and gone to sleep—and
slept that dead and heavy sleep that comes when one wishes
never to awake again. And now Monday was here, and he
had not prepared a single lesson.</p>

<p>He sat up and lighted the bedside candle. But his arms and
shoulders felt so cold that he lay down again and pulled up
the covers.</p>

<p>The hand pointed to ten minutes after six. Oh, it was
absurd to get up now! He should hardly have time to make
a beginning, for there was preparation in nearly every lesson.
And the time he had fixed was already past. Was it as
certain, then, as it had seemed to him yesterday that he would
be called up in Latin and Chemistry? It was certainly to be
expected—in all human probability it would happen. The
names at the end of the alphabet had lately been called in
the Ovid class, and presumably they would begin again at
the beginning. But, after all, it wasn’t so absolutely certain,
beyond a peradventure—there were exceptions to
every rule. Chance sometimes worked wonders, he knew.
He sank deeper and deeper into these false and plausible
speculations; his thoughts began to run in together—he was
asleep.</p>

<p>The little schoolboy bed-chamber, cold and bare, with
the copper-plate of the Sistine Madonna over the bed, the
extension-table in the middle, the untidy book-shelf, a stiff-legged
mahogany desk, the harmonium, and the small wash-hand
stand, lay silent in the flickering light of the candle.
The window was covered with ice-crystals, and the blind
was up in order that the light might come earlier. And
Hanno slept, his cheek pressed into the pillow, his lips
closed, the eyelashes lying close upon his cheek; he slept with
an expression of the most utter abandonment to slumber, the
soft, light-brown hair clustering about his temples. And
slowly the candle-flame lost its reddish-yellow glow, as the
pale, dun-coloured dawn stole into the room through the icy
coating on the window-pane.</p>

<p>At seven he woke once more, with a start of fear. He
must get up and take upon himself the burden of the day.
There was no way out of it. Only a short hour now remained
before school would begin. Time pressed; there was no
thought of preparation now. And yet he continued to lie,
full of exasperation and rebellion against this brutal compulsion
that was upon him to forsake his warm bed in the
frosty dawning and go out into the world, into contact with
harsh and unfriendly people. “Oh, only two little tiny minutes
more,” he begged of his pillow, in overwhelming tenderness.
And then he gave himself a full five minutes more,
out of sheer bravado, and closed his eyes, opening one from
time to time to stare despairingly at the clock, which went
stupidly on in its insensate, accurate way.</p>

<p>Ten minutes after seven o’clock, he tore himself out of
bed and began to move about the room with frantic haste.
He let the candle burn, for the daylight was not enough by
itself. He breathed upon a crystal and, looking out, saw a
thick mist abroad.</p>

<p>He was unutterably cold, and a shiver sometimes shook
his entire body. The ends of his fingers burned; they were
so swollen that he could do nothing with the nail-brush. As
he washed the upper parts of his body, his almost lifeless
hand let fall the sponge, and he stood a moment stiff and
helpless, steaming like a sweating horse.</p>

<p>At last he was dressed. Dull-eyed and breathless, he stood
at the table, collected his despairing senses with a jerk, and
began to put together the books he was likely to need to-day,
murmuring in an anguished voice: “Religion, Latin, chemistry,”
and shuffling together the wretched ink-spotted paper
volumes.</p>

<p>Yes, he was already quite tall, was little Johann. He
was more than fifteen years old, and no longer wore a sailor
costume, but a light-brown jacket suit with a blue-and-white
spotted cravat. Over his waistcoat he wore a long, thin
gold chain that had belonged to his grandfather, and on the
fourth finger of his broad but delicately articulated right
hand was the old seal ring with the green stone. It was
his now. He pulled on his heavy winter jacket, put on his
hat, snatched his school-bag, extinguished the candle, and
dashed down the stair to the ground floor, past the stuffed
bear, and into the dining-room on the right.</p>

<p>Fräulein Clementine, his mother’s new factotum, a thin
girl with curls on her forehead, a pointed nose, and short-sighted
eyes, already sat at the breakfast-table.</p>

<p>“How late is it, really?” he asked between his teeth, though
he already knew with great precision.</p>

<p>“A quarter before eight,” she answered, pointing with a
thin, red, rheumatic-looking hand at the clock on the wall.
“You must get along, Hanno.” She set a steaming cup of
cocoa before him, and pushed the bread and butter, salt, and
an egg-cup toward his place.</p>

<p>He said no more, clutched a roll, and began, standing,
with his hat on and his bag under his arm, to swallow his
cocoa. The hot drink hurt the back tooth which Herr Brecht
had just been working at. He let half of it stand, pushed
away the egg, and with a sound intended for an adieu ran out
of the house.</p>

<p>It was ten minutes to eight when he left the garden and
the little brick villa behind him and dashed along the wintry
avenue. Ten, nine, eight minutes more. And it was a long
way. He could scarcely see for the fog. He drew it in
with his breath and breathed it out again, this thick, icy cold
fog, with all the power of his narrow chest; he stopped his
still throbbing tooth with his tongue, and did fearful violence
to his leg muscles. He was bathed in perspiration; yet he
felt frozen in every limb. He began to have a stitch in his
side. The morsel of breakfast revolted in his stomach
against this morning jaunt which it was taking; he felt nauseated,
and his heart fluttered and trembled so that it took
away his breath.</p>

<p>The Castle Gate—only the Castle Gate—and it was four
minutes to eight! As he panted on through the streets, in an
extremity of mingled pain, perspiration, and nausea, he
looked on all sides for his fellow-pupils. No, there was no
one else; they were all on the spot—and now it was beginning
to strike eight. Bells were ringing all over the town,
and the chimes of St. Mary’s were playing, in celebration of
this moment, “now let us all thank God.” They played half
the notes falsely; they had no idea of rhythm, and they were
badly in want of tuning. Thus Hanno, in the madness of despair.
But what was that to him? He was late; there was no
longer any room for doubt. The school clock was usually a
little behind, but not enough to help him this time. He
stared hopelessly into people’s faces as they passed him.
They were going to their offices or about their business; they
were in no particular hurry; nothing was threatening them.
Some of them looked at him and smiled at his distracted
appearance and sulky looks. He was beside himself at these
smiles. What were they smiling at, these comfortable, unhurried
people? He wanted to shout after them and tell
them their smiling was very uncivil. Perhaps <i>they</i> would
just enjoy falling down dead in front of the closed entrance
gate of the school!</p>

<p>The prolonged shrill ringing which was the signal for
morning prayers struck on his ear while he was still twenty
paces from the long red wall with the two cast-iron gates,
which separated the court of the school-building from the
street. He felt that his legs had no more power to advance:
he simply let his body fall forward, the legs moved willy-nilly
to prevent his stumbling, and thus he staggered on
and arrived at the gate just as the bell had ceased ringing.</p>

<p>Herr Schlemiel, the porter, a heavy man with the face and
rough beard of a labourer, was just about to close the gate.
“Well!” he said, and let Buddenbrook slip through. Perhaps,
perhaps, he might still be saved! What he had to do now
was to slip unobserved into his classroom and wait there
until the end of prayers, which were held in the drill-hall,
and to act as if everything were in order. Panting, exhausted,
in a cold perspiration, he slunk across the courtyard and
through the folding doors with glass panes that divided it
from the interior.</p>

<p>Everything in the establishment was now new, clean, and
adequate. The time had been ripe; and the grey, crumbling
walls of the ancient monastic school had been levelled to
the ground to make room for the spacious, airy, and imposing
new building. The style of the whole had been preserved,
and corridors and cloisters were still spanned by the fine old
Gothic vaulting. But the lighting and heating arrangements,
the ventilation of the classrooms, the comfort of the masters’
rooms, the equipment of the halls for the teaching of chemistry,
physics and design, all this had been carried out on
the most modern lines with respect to comfort and sanitation.</p>

<p>The exhausted Hanno stuck close to the wall and kept
his eyes open as he stole along. Heaven be praised, the
corridors were empty. He heard distantly the hubbub made
by the hosts of masters and pupils going into the drill-hall,
to receive there a little spiritual strengthening for the labours
of the week. But here everything was empty and still, and
his road up the broad linoleum-covered stairs lay free. He
stole up cautiously on his tip-toes, holding his breath, straining
his ears for sounds from above. His classroom, the
lower second of the <i>Realschule</i>, was in the first storey, opposite
the stairs, and the door was open. Crouched on the
top step, he peered down the long corridor, on both sides
of which were the entrances to the various classrooms, with
porcelain signs above them. Three rapid, noiseless steps
forward—and he was in his own room.</p>

<p>It was empty. The curtains of the three large windows
were still drawn, and the gas was burning in the chandelier
with a soft hissing noise. Green shades diffused the light
over the three rows of desks. These desks each had room for
two pupils; they were made of light-coloured wood, and
opposite them, in remote and edifying austerity, stood the
master’s platform with a blackboard behind it. A yellow
wainscoting ran round the lower part of the wall, and above
it the bare white-washed surface was decorated with a few
maps. A second blackboard stood on an easel by the master’s
chair.</p>

<p>Hanno went to his place, which was nearly in the centre
of the room. He stuffed his bag into the desk, sank upon
the hard seat, laid his arms on the sloping lid, and rested
his head upon them. He had a sensation of unspeakable
relief. The room was bare, hard, hateful, and ugly; and the
burden of the whole threatening forenoon, with its numerous
perils, lay before him. But for the moment he was safe; he
had saved his skin, and could take things as they came. The
first lesson, Herr Ballerstedt’s class in religious instruction,
was comparatively harmless. He could see, by the vibration
of the little strips of paper over the ventilator next the ceiling,
that warm air was streaming in, and the gas, too, did its
share to heat the room. He could actually stretch out here
and feel his stiffened limbs slowly thawing. The heat
mounted to his head: it was very pleasant, but not quite
healthful; it made his ears buzz and his eyes heavy.</p>

<p>A sudden noise behind him made him start and turn around.
And behold, from behind the last bench rose the head and
shoulders of Kai, Count Mölln. He crawled out, did this
young man, got up, shook himself, slapped his hands together
to get the dust off, and came up to Hanno with a beaming
face.</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s you, Hanno,” he said. “And I crawled back
there because I took you for a piece of the faculty when you
came in.”</p>

<p>His voice cracked as he spoke, because it was changing,
which Hanno’s had not yet begun to do. He had kept pace
with Hanno in his growth, but his looks had not altered, and
he still wore a dingy suit of no particular colour, with a
button or so missing and a big patch in the seat. His hands,
too, were not quite clean; narrow and aristocratic-looking
though they were, with long, slender fingers and tapering
nails. But his brow was still pure as alabaster beneath the
carelessly parted reddish-yellow hair that fell over it, and
the glance of the sparkling blue eyes was as keen and as
profound as ever. In fact, the contrast was even more striking
between his neglected toilette and the racial purity of
his face, with its delicate bony structure, slightly aquiline
nose, and short upper lip, upon which the down was beginning
to show.</p>

<p>“Oh, Kai,” said Hanno, with a wry face, putting his hand
to his heart. “How can you frighten me like that? What
are you doing up here? Why are you hiding? Did you come
late too?”</p>

<p>“Dear me, no,” Kai said. “I’ve been here a long time.
Though one doesn’t much look forward to getting back to
the old place, when Monday morning comes round. <i>You</i>
must know that yourself, old fellow. No, I only stopped
up here to have a little game. The deep one seems to be
able to reconcile it with his religion to hunt people down to
prayers. Well, I get behind him, and I manage to keep close
behind his back whichever way he turns, the old mystic!
So in the end he goes off, and I can stop up here. But what
about you?” he said sympathetically, sitting down beside
Hanno on the bench. “You had to run, didn’t you? Poor
old chap! You look perfectly worn out. Your hair is sticking
to your forehead.” He took a ruler from the table and
carefully combed little Johann’s hair with it. “You overslept,
didn’t you? Look,” he interrupted himself, “here I
am sitting in the sacred seat of number one—Adolf Todtenhaupt’s
place! Well, it won’t hurt me for once, I suppose.
You overslept, didn’t you?”</p>

<p>Hanno had put his head down on his arms again. “I
was at the opera last night,” he said, heaving a long sigh.</p>

<p>“Right—I’d forgot that. Well, was it beautiful?”</p>

<p>He got no answer.</p>

<p>“You are a lucky fellow, after all,” went on Kai perseveringly.
“I’ve never been in the theatre, not a single time in
my whole life, and there isn’t the smallest prospect of my
going—at least, not for years.”</p>

<p>“If only one did not have to pay for it afterwards,” said
Hanno gloomily.</p>

<p>“The headache next morning—well, I know how that feels,
anyhow.” Kai stooped and picked up his friend’s coat and
hat, which lay on the floor beside the bench, and carried
them quietly out into the corridor.</p>

<p>“Then I take for granted you haven’t done the verses from
the <i>Metamorphoses</i>?” he asked as he came back.</p>

<p>“No,” said Hanno.</p>

<p>“Have you prepared for the geography test?”</p>

<p>“I haven’t done anything, and I don’t know anything,”
said Hanno.</p>

<p>“Not the chemistry nor the English, either? <i>Benissimo!</i>
Then there’s a pair of us—brothers-in-arms,” said Kai, with
obvious gratification. “I’m in exactly the same boat,” he
announced jauntily. “I did no work Saturday, because the
next day was Sunday; and I did no work on Sunday, because
it was Sunday! No, nonsense, it was mostly because I’d
something better to do.” He spoke with sudden earnestness,
and a slight flush spread over his face. “Yes, perhaps it may
be rather lively to-day, Hanno.”</p>

<p>“If I get only one more bad mark, I shan’t go up,” said
Johann; “and I’m sure to get it when I’m called up for Latin.
The letter B comes next, Kai, so there’s not much help for
it.”</p>

<p>“We shall see: What does Caesar say? ‘Dangers may
threaten me in the rear; but when they see the front of
Caesar—’” But Kai did not finish. He was feeling rather
out of sorts himself; he went to the platform and sat down
in the master’s chair, where he began to rock back and
forth, scowling. Hanno still sat with his forehead resting
on his arms. So they remained for a while in silence.</p>

<p>Then, somewhere in the distance, a dull humming was heard,
which quickly swelled to a tumult of voices, approaching,
imminent.</p>

<p>“The mob,” said Kai, in an exasperated tone. “Goodness,
how fast they got through. They haven’t taken up ten minutes
of the period!”</p>

<p>He got down from the platform and went to the door to
mingle with the incoming stream. Hanno, for his part, lifted
up his head for a minute, screwed up his mouth, and remained
seated.</p>

<p>Stamping, shuffling, with a confusion of masculine voices,
treble and falsetto, they flooded up the steps and over the
corridor. The classroom suddenly became full of noise and
movement. This was the lower second form of the <i>Realschule</i>,
some twenty-five strong, comrades of Hanno and Kai.
They loitered to their places with their hands in their pockets
or dangling their arms, sat down, and opened their Bibles.
Some of the faces were pleasant, strong, and healthy; others
were doubtful or suspicious-looking. Here were tall, stout,
lusty rascals who would soon go to sea or else begin a mercantile
career, and who had no further interest in their
school life; and small, ambitious lads, far ahead of their
age, who were brilliant in subjects that could be got by
heart. Adolf Todtenhaupt was the head boy. He knew everything.
In all his school career he had never failed to answer
a question. Part of his reputation was due to his silent,
impassioned industry; but part was also due to the fact that
the masters were careful not to ask him anything he might
not know. It would have pained and mortified them and
shaken their faith in human perfectibility to have Adolf
Todtenhaupt fail to answer. He had a head full of remarkable
bumps, to which his blond hair clung as smooth as glass;
grey eyes with black rings beneath them, and long brown
hands that stuck out beneath the too short sleeves of his neatly
brushed jacket. He sat down next Hanno Buddenbrook with
a mild, rather sly smile, and bade his neighbour good morning
in the customary jargon, which reduced the greeting to a single
careless monosyllable. Then he began to employ himself
silently with the class register, holding his pen in a way that
was incomparably correct, with the slender fingers outstretched;
while about him people yawned, laughed, conned
their lessons, and chattered half aloud.</p>

<p>After two minutes there were steps outside. The front
rows of pupils rose, and some of those seated farther back
followed their example. The rest scarcely interrupted what
they were doing as Herr Ballerstedt came into the room,
hung his hat on the door, and betook himself to the platform.</p>

<p>He was a man in the forties, with a pleasant <i>embonpoint</i>,
a large bald spot, a short beard, a rosy complexion, and a
mingled expression of unctuousness and sensuality on his
humid lips. He took out his notebook and turned over the
leaves in silence; but as the order in the classroom left much
to be desired, he lifted his head, stretched out his arm over
the desk, and waved his flabby white fist a few times powerlessly
in the air. His face grew slowly red—such a dark
red that his beard looked pale-yellow by contrast. He moved
his lips and struggled spasmodically and fruitlessly for half
a minute to speak, and finally brought out a single syllable,
a short, suppressed grunt that sounded like “Well!” He
still struggled after further expression, but in the end gave
it up, returned to his notebook, calmed down, and became
quite composed once more. This was Herr Ballerstedt’s way.</p>

<p>He had intended to be a priest; but on account of his
tendency to stutter and his leaning toward the good things
of life he had become a pedagogue instead. He was a bachelor
of some means, wore a small diamond on his finger, and
was much given to eating and drinking. He was the head
master who associated with his fellow masters only in working
hours; and outside them he spent his time chiefly with
the bachelor society of the town—yes, even with the officers of
the garrison. He ate twice a day in the best hotel and was
a member of the club. If he met any of his elder pupils
in the streets, late at night or at two or three o’clock in the
morning, he would puff up the way he did in the classroom,
fetch out a “Good morning,” and let the matter rest there,
on both sides. From this master Hanno Buddenbrook had
nothing to fear and was almost never called up by
him. Herr Ballerstedt had been too often associated with
Hanno’s Uncle Christian in all too purely human affairs, to
make him inclined to conflict with Johann in an official
capacity.</p>

<p>“Well,” he said, looked about him once more, waved his
flabby fist with the diamond upon it, and glanced into his
notebook. “Perlemann, the synopsis.”</p>

<p>Somewhere in the class, up rose Perlemann. One could
hardly see that he had risen; he was one of the small and
forward ones. “The synopsis,” he said, softly and politely,
craning his neck forward with a nervous smile. “The Book
of Job falls into three sections. First, the condition of Job
before he fell under the chastening of the Lord: Chapter
One, Verses one to six: second, the chastening itself, and
its consequences, Chapter—”</p>

<p>“Right, Perlemann,” interrupted Herr Ballerstedt, touched
by so much modesty and obligingness. He put down a good
mark in his book. “Continue, Heinricy.”</p>

<p>Heinricy was one of the tall rascals who gave themselves
no trouble over anything. He shoved the knife he had been
playing with into his pocket, and got up noisily, with his
lower lip hanging, and coughing in a gruff voice. Nobody
was pleased to have him called up after the gentle Perlemann.
The pupils sat drowsing in the warm room, some of them
half asleep, soothed by the purring sound of the gas. They
were all tired after the holiday; they had all crawled out of
warm beds that morning with their teeth chattering, groaning
in spirit. And they would have preferred to have the gentle
Perlemann drone on for the remainder of the period. Heinricy
was almost sure to make trouble.</p>

<p>“I wasn’t here when we had this,” he said, none too respectfully.</p>

<p>Herr Ballerstedt puffed himself up, waved his fist, struggled
to speak, and stared young Heinricy in the face with his
eyebrows raised. His head shook with the effort he made;
but he finally managed to bring out a “Well!” and the spell
was broken. He went on with perfect fluency. “There is
never any work to be got out of you, and you always have
an excuse ready, Heinricy. If you were ill the last time, you
could have had help in that part; besides, if the first part
dealt with the condition before the tribulation, and the second
part with the tribulation itself, you could have told by counting
on your fingers that the third part must deal with the condition
after the tribulation! But you have no application or
interest whatever; you are not only a poor creature, but
you are always ready to excuse and defend your mistakes.
But so long as this is the case, Heinricy, you cannot expect
to make any improvement, and so I warn you. Sit down,
Heinricy. Go on, Wasservogel.”</p>

<p>Heinricy, thick-skinned and defiant, sat down with much
shuffling and scraping, whispered some sort of saucy comment
in his neighbour’s ear, and took out his jack-knife again.
Wasservogel stood up: a boy with inflamed eyes, a snub nose,
prominent ears, and bitten fingernails. He finished the summary
in a rather whining voice, and began to relate the story
of Job, the man from the land of Uz, and what happened to
him. He had simply opened his Bible, behind the back of
the pupil ahead of him; and he read from it with an air of
utter innocence and concentration, staring then at a point on
the wall and translated what he read, coughing the while, into
awkward and hesitating modern German. There was something
positively repulsive about Wasservogel; but Herr Ballerstedt
gave him a large meed of praise. Wasservogel had the
knack of making the masters like him; and they praised him
in order to show that they were incapable of being led away
by his ugliness to blame him unjustly.</p>

<p>The lesson continued. Various pupils were called up
to display their knowledge touching Job, the man from the
land of Uz. Gottlob Kassbaum, son of the unfortunate merchant
P. Philipp Kassbaum, got an excellent mark, despite
the late distressing circumstances of his family, because he
knew that Job had seven thousand sheep, three thousand
camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred asses, and a
large number of servants.</p>

<p>Then the Bibles, which were already open, were permitted
to be opened, and they went on reading. Wherever Herr
Ballerstedt thought explanation necessary, he puffed himself
up, said “Well!” and after these customary preliminaries
made a little speech upon the point in question, interspersed
with abstract moral observations. Not a soul listened. A
slumberous peace reigned in the room. The heat, with the
continuous influx of warm air and the still lighted gas
burners, had become oppressive, and the air was well-nigh
exhausted by these twenty-five breathing and steaming organisms.
The warmth, the purring of the gas, and the drone
of the reader’s voice lulled them all to a point where they
were more asleep than awake. Kai, Count Mölln, however,
had a volume of Edgar Allan Poe’s <i>Tales</i> inside his Bible,
and read in it, supporting his head on his hand. Hanno
Buddenbrook leaned back, sank down in his seat, and looked
with relaxed mouth and hot, swimming eyes at the Book of
Job, in which all the lines ran together into a black haze.
Now and then, as the Grail <i>motif</i> or the Wedding March came
into his mind, his lids drooped and he felt an inward soothing;
and then he would wish that this safe and peaceful
morning hour might go on for ever.</p>

<p>Yet it ended, as all things must end. The shrill sound of
the bell, clanging and echoing through the corridor, shook
the twenty-five brains out of their slumberous calm.</p>

<p>“That is all,” said Herr Ballerstedt. The register was
handed up to him and he signed his name in it, as evidence
that he had performed his office.</p>

<p>Hanno Buddenbrook closed his Bible and stretched himself,
yawning. It was a nervous yawn; and as he dropped his
arms and relaxed his limbs he had to take a long, deep breath
to bring his heart back to a steady pulsation, for it weakly
refused its office for a second. Latin came next. He cast
a beseeching glance at Kai, who still sat there reading and
seemed not to have remarked the end of the lesson. Then
he drew out his Ovid, in stitched covers of marbled paper,
and opened it at the lines that were to have been learned by
heart for to-day. No, it was no use now trying to memorize
any of it: the regular lines, full of pencil marks, numbered
by fives all the way down the page, looked hopelessly unfamiliar.
He barely understood the sense of them, let alone
trying to say a single one of them by heart. And of those
in to-day’s preparation he had not puzzled out even the first
sentence.</p>

<p>“What does that mean—‘<i>deciderant, patula Jovis arbore
glandes</i>’?” he asked in a despairing voice, turning to Adolf
Todtenhaupt, who sat beside him working on the register.</p>

<p>“What?” asked Todtenhaupt, continuing to write. “The
acorns from the tree of Jupiter—that is the oak; no, I don’t
quite know myself—”</p>

<p>“Tell me a bit, Todtenhaupt, when it comes my turn, will
you?” begged Hanno, and pushed the book away. He
scowled at the cool and careless nod Todtenhaupt gave by
way of reply; then he slid sidewise off the bench and stood
up.</p>

<p>The scene had changed. Herr Ballerstedt had left the
room, and his place was taken by a small, weak enervated
little man who stood straight and severe on the platform.
He had a sparse white beard and a thin red neck that rose
out of a narrow turned-down collar. He held his top-hat
upside down in front of him, clasped in two small hands
covered with white hair. His real name was Professor
Hückopp, but he was called “Spider” by the pupils. He
was in charge of classrooms and corridors during the recess.
“Out with the gas! Up with the blinds! Up with the
windows!” he said, and gave his voice as commanding a tone
as possible, moving his little arm in the air with an awkward,
energetic gesture, as if he were turning a crank. “Everybody
downstairs, into the fresh air, as quick as possible!”</p>

<p>The gas went out, the blinds flew up, the sallow daylight
filled the room. The cold mist rushed in through the wide-open
windows, and the lower second crowded past Professor
Hückopp to the exit. Only the head boy might remain
upstairs.</p>

<p>Hanno and Kai met at the door and went down the stairs
together, and across the architecturally correct vestibule.
They were silent. Hanno looked pathetically unwell, and
Kai was deep in thought. They reached the courtyard and
began to stroll up and down across the wet red tiles, among
school companions of all ages and sizes.</p>

<p>A youthful looking man with a blond pointed beard kept
order down here: Dr. Goldener, the “dressy one.” He
kept a <i>pensionnat</i> for the sons of the rich landowners from
Mecklenburg and Holstein, and dressed, on account of these
aristocratic youths, with an elegance not apparent in the
other masters. He wore silk cravats, a dandified coat, and
pale-coloured trousers fastened down with straps under the
soles of his boots, and used perfumed handkerchiefs with
coloured borders. He came of rather simple people, and all
this elegance was not very becoming—his huge feet, for example,
looked absurd in the pointed buttoned boots he wore.
He was vain of his plump red hands, too, and kept rubbing
them together, clasping them before him, and regarding them
with every mark of admiration. He carried his head laid
far back on one side, and constantly made faces by blinking,
screwing up his nose, and half-opening his mouth, as though
he were about to say: “What’s the matter now?” But his refinement
led him to overlook all sorts of small infractions of
the rules. He overlooked this or that pupil who had brought
a book with him into the courtyard to prepare a little at
the eleventh hour; he overlooked the fact that one of his
boarding-pupils handed money to the porter, Herr Schlemiel,
and asked him to get some pastry; he overlooked a small
trial of strength between two third-form pupils, which resulted
in a beating of one by the other, and around which a
ring of connoisseurs was quickly formed; and he overlooked
certain sounds behind him which indicated that a pupil who
had made himself unpopular by cheating, cowardice, or other
weakness was being forcibly escorted to the pump.</p>

<p>It was a lusty, not too gentle race, that of these comrades of
Hanno and Kai among whom they walked up and down. The
ideals of the victorious, united fatherland were those of a
somewhat rude masculinity; its youth talked in a jargon at
once brisk and slovenly; the most despised vices were softness
and dandyism, the most admired virtues those displayed
by prowess in drinking and smoking, bodily strength and
skill in athletics. Whoever went out with his coat-collar
turned up incurred a visit to the pump; while he who let himself
be seen in the streets with a walking-stick must expect
a public and ignominious correction administered in the
drill-hall.</p>

<p>Hanno’s and Kai’s conversation was in striking contrast
to that which went on around them among their fellows.
This friendship had been recognized in the school for a long
time. The masters suffered it grudgingly, suspecting that
it meant disaffection and future trouble. The pupils could
not understand it, but had settled down to regarding it with a
sort of embarrassed dislike, and to thinking of the two friends
as outlaws and eccentrics who must be left to their own devices.
They recognized, it is true, the wildness and insubordination
of Kai, Count Mölln, and respected him accordingly.
As for Hanno Buddenbrook, big Heinricy, who
thrashed everybody, could not make up his mind to lay a
finger on him by way of chastisement for dandyism or cowardice.
He refrained out of an indefinite respect and awe
for the softness of Hanno’s hair, the delicacy of his limbs,
and his sad, shy, cold glance.</p>

<p>“I’m scared,” Hanno said to Kai. He leaned against the
wall of the school, drawing his jacket closer about him,
yawning and shivering, “I’m so scared, Kai, that it hurts
me all over my body. Now just tell me this: is Herr Mantelsack
the sort of person one ought to be afraid of? Tell me
yourself! If this beastly Ovid lesson were only over! If
I just had my bad mark, in peace, and stopped where I am,
and everything was in order! I’m not afraid of that. It is
the row that goes beforehand that I hate!”</p>

<p>Kai was still deep in thought. “This Roderick Usher is
the most remarkable character ever conceived,” he said suddenly
and abruptly. “I have read the whole lesson-hour.
If ever I could write a tale like that!”</p>

<p>Kai was absorbed in his writing. It was to this he had
referred when he said that he had something better to
do than his preparation, and Hanno had understood him.
Attempts at composition had developed out of his old propensity
for inventing tales; and he had lately completed a
composition in the form of a fantastic fairy tale, a narrative
of symbolic adventure, which went forward in the depths
of the earth among glowing metals and mysterious fires, and
at the same time in the souls of men: a tale in which the
primeval forces of nature and of the soul were interchanged
and mingled, transformed and refined—the whole conceived
and written in a vein of extravagant and even sentimental
symbolism, fervid with passion and longing.</p>

<p>Hanno knew the tale well, and loved it; but he was not now
in a frame of mind to think of Kai’s work or of Edgar Allan
Poe. He yawned again, and then sighed, humming to himself
a <i>motif</i> he had lately composed on the piano. This was
a habit with him. He would often give a long sigh, a deep
indrawn breath, from the instinct to calm the fluctuating and
irregular action of his heart; and he had accustomed himself
to set the deep breathing to a musical theme of his own or
some one else’s invention.</p>

<p>“Look, there comes the Lord God,” said Kai. “He is
walking in his garden.”</p>

<p>“Fine garden,” said Hanno. He began to laugh nervously,
and could not stop; putting his handkerchief to his mouth the
while and looking across the courtyard at him whom Kai
called the Lord God.</p>

<p>This was Director Wulicke, the head of the school, who had
appeared in the courtyard: an extremely tall man with a
slouch hat, a short heavy beard, a prominent abdomen, trousers
that were far too short, and very dirty funnel-shaped cuffs.
He strode across the flagstones with a face so angry in its
expression that he seemed to be actually suffering, and
pointed at the pump with outstretched arm. The water was
running! A train of pupils ran before him and stumbled in
their zeal to repair the damage. Then they stood about,
looking first at the pump and then at the Director, their faces
pictures of distress; and the Director, meanwhile, had turned
to Dr. Goldener, who hurried up with a very red face and
spoke to him in a deep hollow voice, fairly babbling with
excitement between the words.</p>

<p>This Director Wulicke was a most formidable man. He
had succeeded to the headship of the school after the death,
soon after 1871, of the genial and benevolent old gentleman
under whose guidance Hanno’s father and uncle had pursued
their studies. Dr. Wulicke was summoned from a professorship
in a Prussian high school; and with his advent an entirely
new spirit entered the school. In the old days the
classical course had been thought of as an end in itself, to
be pursued at one’s ease, with a sense of joyous idealism.
But now the leading conceptions were authority, duty, power,
service, the career; “the categorical imperative of our
philosopher Kant” was inscribed upon the banner which Dr.
Wulicke in every official speech unfurled to the breeze. The
school became a state within a state, in which not only the
masters but the pupils regarded themselves as officials, whose
main concern was the advancement they could make, and
who must therefore take care to stand well with the authorities.
Soon after the new Director was installed in his office
the tearing down of the old school began, and the new one
was built up on the most approved hygienic and aesthetic
principles, and everything went swimmingly. But it remained
an open question whether the old school, as an institution, with
its smaller endowment of modern comfort and its larger share
of gay good nature, courage, charm, and good feeling, had
not been more blest and blessing than the new.</p>

<p>As for Dr. Wulicke himself personally, he had all the
awful mystery, duplicity, obstinacy, and jealousy of the Old
Testament God. He was as frightful in his smiles as in his
anger. The result of the enormous authority that lay in
his hands was that he grew more and more arbitrary and
moody—he was even capable of making a joke and then
visiting with his wrath anybody who dared to laugh. Not
one of his trembling creatures knew how to act before him.
They found it safest to honour him in the dust, and to protect
themselves by a frantic abasement from the fate of being
whirled up in the cloud of his wrath and crushed for ever
under the weight of his righteous displeasure.</p>

<p>The name Kai had given Dr. Wulicke was known only to
himself and Hanno, and they took the greatest pains not to
let any of the others overhear it, for they could not possibly
understand. No, there was not one single point on which
those two stood on common ground with their schoolfellows.
Even the methods of revenge, of “getting even,” which obtained
in the school were foreign to Hanno and Kai; and
they utterly disdained the current nicknames, which did not
in the least appeal to their more subtle sense of humour. It
was so poor, it showed such a paucity of invention, to call
thin Professor Hückopp “Spider” and Herr Ballerstedt
“Cocky.” It was such scant compensation for their compulsory
service to the state! No, Kai, Count Mölln, flattered
himself that he was not so feeble as that! He invented, for
his own and Hanno’s use, a method of alluding to all their
masters by their actual names, with the simple prefix,
thus: Herr Ballerstedt, Herr Hückopp. The irony of this,
its chilly remoteness and mockery, pleased him very much.
He liked to speak of the “teaching body”; and would amuse
himself for whole recesses with imagining it as an actual
creature, a sort of monster, with a repulsively fantastic form.
And they spoke in general of the “Institution” as if it were
similar to that which harboured Hanno’s Uncle Christian.</p>

<p>Kai’s mood improved at sight of the Lord God, who still
pervaded the playground and put everybody in a pallid
fright by pointing, with fearful rumblings, to the wrapping
papers from the luncheons which strewed the courtyard. The
two lads went off to one of the gates, through which the
masters in charge of the second period were now entering.
Kai began to make bows of exaggerated respect before the
red-eyed, pale, shabby-looking seminarists, who crossed over to
go to their sixth and seventh form pupils in the back court.
And when the grey-haired mathematics master, Herr Tietge,
appeared, holding a bundle of books on his back with a
shaking hand, bent, yellow, cross-eyed, spitting as he walked
along, Kai said, “Good morning, old dead man.” He said
this, in a loud voice and gazed straight up into the air with
his bright, sharp gaze.</p>

<p>Then the bell clanged loudly, and the pupils began to
stream through the entrances into the building. Hanno
could not stop laughing. He was still laughing so hard on
the stairs that his classmates looked at him and Kai with
wonder and cold hostility, and even with a slight disgust at
such frivolity.</p>

<p>There was a sudden hush in the classroom, and everybody
stood up, as Herr Professor Mantelsack entered. He was the
Professor <i>ordinarius</i>, for whom it was usual to show respect.
He pulled the door to after him, bowed, craned his neck to
see if all the class were standing up, hung his hat on its
nail, and went quickly to the platform, moving his head
rapidly up and down as he went. He took his place and stood
for a while looking out the window and, running his forefinger,
with a large seal ring on it, around inside his collar.
He was a man of medium size, with thin grey hair, a curled
Olympian beard, and short-sighted prominent sapphire-blue
eyes gleaming behind his spectacles. He was dressed in an
open frock-coat of soft grey material, which he habitually
settled at the waist with his short-fingered, wrinkled hand.
His trousers were, like all the other masters’, even the elegant
Dr. Goldener’s, far too short, and showed the legs of a pair
of very broad and shiny boots.</p>

<p>He turned sharply away from the window and gave vent
to a little good-natured sigh, smiling familiarly at several
pupils. His mood was obviously good, and a wave of relief
ran through the classroom. So much—everything, in fact—depended
on whether Dr. Mantelsack was in a good mood!
For the whole form was aware that he gave way to the feeling
of the moment, whatever that might happen to be, without
the slightest restraint. He was most extraordinarily,
boundlessly, naïvely unjust, and his favour was as inconstant
as that of fortune herself. He had always a few favourites—two
or three—whom he called by their given names, and
these lived in paradise. They might say almost anything
they liked; and after the lesson Dr. Mantelsack would talk
with them just like a human being. But a day would come—perhaps
after the holidays—when for no apparent reason
they were dethroned, cast out, rejected, and others elevated
to their place. The mistakes of these favourites would be
passed over with neat, careful corrections, so that their work
retained a respectable appearance, no matter how bad it was;
whereas he would attack the other copy-books with heavy,
ruthless pen, and fairly flood them with red ink, so that their
appearance was shocking indeed. And as he never troubled
to count the mistakes, but distributed bad marks in proportion
to the red ink he had expended, his favourites always emerged
with great credit from these exercises. He was not even aware
of the rank injustice of this conduct. And if anybody had
ever had the temerity to call his attention to it, that person
would have been for ever deprived of even the chance of becoming
a favourite and being called by his first name. There
was nobody who was willing to let slip the chance.</p>

<p>Now Dr. Mantelsack crossed his legs, still standing, and
began to turn over the leaves of his notebook. Hanno
Buddenbrook wrung his hands under the desk. B, the letter
B, came next. Now he would hear his name, he would get
up, he would not know a line, and there would be a row,
a loud, frightful catastrophe—no matter how good a mood
Dr. Mantelsack might be in. The seconds dragged out, each
a martyrdom. “Buddenbrook”— Now he would say “Buddenbrook.”
“Edgar,” said Dr. Mantelsack, closing his notebook
with his finger in it. He sat down, as if all were in
the best of order.</p>

<p>What? Who? Edgar? That was Lüders, the fat Lüders
boy over there by the window. Letter L, which was not next
at all! No! Was it possible? Dr. Mantelsack’s mood was
so good that he simply selected one of his favourites, without
troubling in the least about whose turn it was.</p>

<p>Lüders stood up. He had a face like a pug dog, and dull
brown eyes. He had an advantageous seat, and could easily
have read it off, but he was too lazy. He felt too secure in
his paradise, and answered simply, “I had a headache yesterday,
and couldn’t study.”</p>

<p>“Oh, so you are leaving me in the lurch, Edgar,” said
Dr. Mantelsack with tender reproach. “You cannot say
the lines on the Golden Age? What a shocking pity, my
friend! You had a headache? It seems to me you should
have told me before the lesson began, instead of waiting till
I called you up. Didn’t you have a headache just lately,
Edgar? You should do something for them, for otherwise
there is danger of your not passing. Timm, will you take
his place?”</p>

<p>Lüders sat down. At this moment he was the object of universal
hatred. It was plain that the master’s mood had altered
for the worse, and that Lüders, perhaps in the very
next lesson, would be called by his last name. Timm stood
up in one of the back seats. He was a blond country-looking
lad with a light-brown jacket and short, broad fingers. He
held his mouth open in a funnel shape, and hastily found the
place, looking straight ahead the while with the most idiotic
expression. Then he put down his head and began to read, in
long-drawn-out, monotonous, hesitating accents, like a child
with a first lesson-book: “<i>Aurea prima sata est ætas!</i>”</p>

<p>It was plain that Dr. Mantelsack was calling up quite at
random, without reference to the alphabet. And thus it was
no longer so imminently likely that Hanno would be called
on, though this might happen through unlucky chance. He
exchanged a joyful glance with Kai and began to relax somewhat.</p>

<p>But now Timm’s reading was interrupted. Whether Dr.
Mantelsack could not hear him, or whether he stood in need
of exercise, is not to be known. But he left his platform and
walked slowly down through the room. He paused near
Timm, with his book in his hand; Timm meanwhile had succeeded
in getting his own book out of sight, but was now
entirely helpless. His funnel-shaped mouth emitted a gasp,
he looked at the <i>Ordinarius</i> with honest, troubled blue eyes,
and could not fetch out another syllable.</p>

<p>“Well, Timm,” said Dr. Mantelsack. “Can’t you get on?”</p>

<p>Timm clutched his brow, rolled up his eyes, sighed windily,
and said with a dazed smile: “I get all mixed up, Herr
Doctor, when you stand so close to me.”</p>

<p>Dr. Mantelsack smiled too. He smiled in a very flattered
way and said “Well, pull yourself together and get on.”
And he strolled back to his place.</p>

<p>And Timm pulled himself together. He drew out and
opened his book again, all the time apparently wrestling to
recover his self-control and staring about the room. Then
he dropped his head and was himself again.</p>

<p>“Very good,” said the master, when he had finished. “It
is clear that you have studied to some purpose. But you
sacrifice the rhythm too much, Timm. You seem to understand
the elisions; yet you have not been really reading hexameters
at all. I have an impression as if you had learned the
whole thing by heart, like prose. But, as I say, you have
been diligent, you have done your best—and whoever does his
best—; you may sit down.”</p>

<p>Timm sat down, proud and beaming, and Dr. Mantelsack
gave him a good mark in his book. And the extraordinary
thing was that at this moment not only the master, but also
Timm himself and all his classmates, sincerely felt that Timm
was a good industrious pupil who had fully deserved the
mark he got. Hanno Buddenbrook, even, thought the same,
though something within him revolted against the thought.
He listened with strained attention to the next name.</p>

<p>“Mumme,” said Dr. Mantelsack. “Again: <i>aurea prima</i>—”</p>

<p>Mumme! Well! Thank Heaven! Hanno was now in
probable safety. The lines would hardly be asked for a
third time, and in the sight-reading the letter B had just been
called up.</p>

<p>Mumme got up. He was tall and pale, with trembling hands
and extraordinarily large round glasses. He had trouble
with his eyes, and was so short-sighted that he could not
possibly read standing up from a book on the desk before
him. He had to learn, and he had learned. But to-day he
had not expected to be called up; he was, besides, painfully
ungifted; and he stuck after the first few words. Dr.
Mumme helped him, he helped him again in a sharper tone,
and for the third time with intense irritation. But when
Mumme came to a final stop, the <i>Ordinarius</i> was mastered by
indignation.</p>

<p>“This is entirely insufficient, Mumme. Sit down. You
cut a disgraceful figure, let me tell you, sir. A <i>cretin</i>! Stupid
and lazy both—it is really too much.”</p>

<p>Mumme was overwhelmed. He looked the child of calamity,
and at this moment everybody in the room despised
him. A sort of disgust, almost like nausea, mounted again in
Hanno Buddenbrook’s throat; but at the same time he observed
with horrid clarity all that was going forward. Dr.
Mantelsack made a mark of sinister meaning after Mumme’s
name, and then looked through his notebook with frowning
brows. He went over, in his disgust, to the order of the
day, and looked to see whose turn it really was. There was
no doubt that this was the case: and just as Hanno was overpowered
by this knowledge, he heard his name—as if in a
bad dream.</p>

<p>“Buddenbrook!” Dr. Mantelsack had said “Buddenbrook.”
The scale was in the air again. Hanno could not believe his
senses. There was a buzzing in his ears. He sat still.</p>

<p>“Herr Buddenbrook!” said Dr. Mantelsack, and stared at
him sharply through his glasses with his prominent sapphire-blue
eyes. “Will you have the goodness?”</p>

<p>Very well, then. It was to be. It had to come. It had
come differently from his expectations, but still, here it was,
and he was none the less lost. But he was calm. Would
it be a very big row? He rose in his place and was about
to utter some forlorn and absurd excuse to the effect that he
had “forgotten” to study the lines, when he became aware
that the boy ahead of him was offering him his open book.</p>

<p>This boy, Hans Hermann Kilian, was a small brown lad
with oily hair and broad shoulders. He had set his heart
on becoming an officer, and was so possessed by an ideal of
comradeship that he would not leave in the lurch even little
Buddenbrook, whom he did not like. He pointed with his
finger to the place.</p>

<p>Hanno gazed down upon it and began to read. With
trembling voice, his face working, he read of the Golden Age,
when truth and justice flourished of their own free will, without
laws or compulsions. “Punishment and fear did not
exist,” he said, in Latin. “No threats were graven upon the
bronze tablets, nor did those who came to petition fear the
countenance of the judges....” He read in fear and
trembling, read with design badly and disjointedly, purposely
omitted some of the elisions that were marked with pencil
in Kilian’s book, made mistakes in the lines, progressed with
apparent difficulty, and constantly expected the master to
discover the fraud and pounce upon him. The guilty satisfaction
of seeing the open book in front of him gave him a
pricking sensation in his skin; but at the same time he had
such a feeling of disgust that he intentionally deceived as
badly as possible, simply to make the deceit seem less vulgar
to himself. He came to the end, and a pause ensued, during
which he did not dare look up. He felt convinced that Dr.
Mantelsack had seen all, and his lips were perfectly white.
But at length the master sighed and said:</p>

<p>“Oh, Buddenbrook! <i>Si tacuisses!</i> You will permit me
the classical thou, for this once. Do you know what you
have done? You have conducted yourself like a vandal, a
barbarian. You are a humourist, Buddenbrook; I can see
that by your face. If I ask myself whether you have been
coughing or whether you have been reciting this noble verse, I
should incline to the former. Timm showed small feeling
for rhythm, but compared to you he is a genius, a rhapsodist!
Sit down, unhappy wretch! You have studied the lines, I
cannot deny it, and I am constrained to give you a good
mark. You have probably done your best. But tell me—have
I not been told that you are musical, that you play the
piano? How is it possible? Well, very well, sit down. You
have worked hard—that must suffice.”</p>

<p>He put a good mark down in his book, and Hanno Buddenbrook
took his seat. He felt as Timm, the rhapsodist had
felt before him—that he really deserved the praise which
Dr. Mantelsack gave him. Yes, at the moment he was of the
opinion that he was, if rather a dull, yet an industrious
pupil, who had come off with honour, comparatively speaking.
He was conscious that all his schoolmates, not excepting
Hans Hermann Kilian, had the same view. Yet he felt at the
same time somewhat nauseated. Pale, trembling, too exhausted
to think about what had happened, he closed his eyes
and sank back in lethargy.</p>

<p>Dr. Mantelsack, however, went on with the lesson. He
came to the verses that were to have been prepared for to-day,
and called up Petersen. Petersen rose, fresh, lively,
sanguine, in a stout attitude, ready for the fray. Yet to-day,
even to-day, was destined to see his fall. Yes, the lesson-hour
was not to pass without a catastrophe far worse than that
which had befallen the hapless, short-sighted Mumme.</p>

<p>Petersen translated, glancing now and then at the other
page of his book, which should have had nothing on it. He
did it quite cleverly: he acted as though something there distracted
him—a speck of dust, perhaps, which he brushed with
his hand or tried to blow away. And yet—there followed the
catastrophe.</p>

<p>Dr. Mantelsack made a sudden violent movement, which was
responded to on Petersen’s part by a similar movement. And
in the same moment the master left his seat, dashed headlong
down from his platform, and approached Petersen with long,
impetuous strides.</p>

<p>“You have a crib in your book,” he said as he came up.</p>

<p>“A crib—I—no,” stammered Petersen. He was a charming
lad, with a great wave of blond hair on his forehead and
lovely blue eyes which now flickered in a frightened way.</p>

<p>“You have no crib in your book?”</p>

<p>“A crib, Herr Doctor? No, really, I haven’t. You are
mistaken. You are accusing me falsely.” Petersen betrayed
himself by the unnatural correctness of his language, which
he used in order to intimidate the master. “I am not deceiving
you,” he repeated, in the greatness of his need. “I
have always been honourable, my whole life long.”</p>

<p>But Dr. Mantelsack was all too certain of the painful fact.</p>

<p>“Give me your book,” he said coldly.</p>

<p>Petersen clung to his book; he raised it up in both hands
and went on protesting. He stammered, his tongue grew
thick. “Believe me, Herr Doctor. There is nothing in the
book—I have no crib—I have not deceived you—I have always
been honourable—”</p>

<p>“Give me your book,” repeated the master, stamping his
foot.</p>

<p>Then Petersen collapsed, and his face grew grey.</p>

<p>“Very well,” said he, and delivered up his book. “Here it
is. Yes, there is a crib in it. You can see for yourself; there
it is. But I haven’t used it,” he suddenly shrieked, quite at
random.</p>

<p>Dr. Mantelsack ignored this idiotic lie, which was rooted
in despair. He drew out the crib, looked at it with an expression
of extreme disgust, as if it were a piece of decaying
offal, thrust it into his pocket, and threw the volume of Ovid
contemptuously back on Petersen’s desk.</p>

<p>“Give me the class register,” he said in a hollow voice.</p>

<p>Adolf Todtenhaupt dutifully fetched it, and Petersen received
a mark for dishonesty which effectually demolished his
chances of being sent up at Easter. “You are the shame of the
class,” said Dr. Mantelsack.</p>

<p>Petersen sat down. He was condemned. His neighbour
avoided contact with him. Every one looked at him with a
mixture of pity, aversion, and disgust. He had fallen, utterly
and completely, because he had been found out. There was
but one opinion as to Petersen, and that was that he was, in
very truth, the shame of the class. They recognized and accepted
his fall, as they had the rise of Timm and Buddenbrook
and the unhappy Mumme’s mischance. And Petersen
did too.</p>

<p>Thus most of this class of twenty-five young folk, being of
sound and strong constitution, armed and prepared to wage
the battle of life as it is, took things just as they found them,
and did not at this moment feel any offence or uneasiness.
Everything seemed to them to be quite in order. But one pair
of eyes, little Johann’s, which stared gloomily at a point on
Hans Hermann Kilian’s broad back, were filled, in their blue-shadowed
depths, with abhorrence, fear, and revulsion. The
lesson went on. Dr. Mantelsack called on somebody, anybody—he
had lost all desire to test any one. And after Adolf
Todtenhaupt, another pupil, who was but moderately prepared,
and did not even know what “<i>patula Jovis arbore</i>” meant, had
been called on, Buddenbrook had to say it. He said it in a
low voice, without looking up, because Dr. Mantelsack asked
him, and he received a nod of the head for the answer.</p>

<p>And now that the performance of the pupils was over, the
lesson had lost all interest. Dr. Mantelsack had one of the
best scholars read at his own sweet will, and listened just as
little as the twenty-four others, who began to get ready for the
next class. This one was finished, in effect. No one could be
marked on it, nor his interest or industry judged. And the
bell would soon ring. It did ring. It rang for Hanno, and he
had received a nod of approbation. Thus it was.</p>

<p>“Well!” said Kai to Hanno, as they walked down the
Gothic corridor with their classmates, to go to the chemistry
class, “what do you say now about the brow of Caesar? You
had wonderful luck!”</p>

<p>“I feel sick, Kai,” said little Johann, “I don’t like that kind
of luck. It makes me sick.” Kai knew he would have felt
the same in Hanno’s place.</p>

<p>The chemistry hall was a vaulted chamber like an amphitheatre
with benches rising in tiers, a long table for the experiments,
and two glass cases of phials. The air in the classroom
had grown very hot and heavy again; but here it was
saturated with an odour of sulphuretted hydrogen from a just-completed
experiment, and smelled abominable. Kai flung
up the window and then stole Adolf Todtenhaupt’s copy-book
and began in great haste to copy down the lesson for the day.
Hanno and several others did the same. This occupied the
entire pause till the bell rang, and Dr. Marotzke came in.</p>

<p>This was the “deep one,” as Kai and Hanno called him. He
was a medium-sized dark man with a very yellow skin, two
large lumps on his brow, a stiff smeary beard, and hair of the
same kind. He always looked unwashed and unkempt, but
his appearance probably belied him. He taught the
natural sciences, but his own field was mathematics, in which
subject he had the reputation of being an original thinker.
He liked to hold forth on the subject of metaphysical passages
from the Bible; and when in a good-natured or discursive
mood, he would entertain the boys of the first and second
forms with marvellous interpretations of mysterious passages.
He was, besides all this, a reserve officer, and very enthusiastic
over the service. As an official who was also in the army, he
stood very well with Director Wulicke. He set more store by
discipline than any of the other masters: he would review
the ranks of sturdy youngsters with a professional eye,
and he insisted on short, brisk answers to questions. This
mixture of mysticism and severity was not, on the whole,
attractive.</p>

<p>The copy-books were shown, and Dr. Marotzke went around
and touched each one with his finger. Some of the pupils who
had not done theirs at all, put down other books or turned this
one back to an old lesson; but he never noticed.</p>

<p>Then the lesson began, and the twenty-five boys had to display
their industry and interest with respect to boric acid, and
chlorine, and strontium, as in the previous period they had
displayed it with respect to Ovid. Hans Hermann Kilian was
commended because he knew that BaSO<sub>4</sub>, or barytes, was the
metal most commonly used in counterfeiting. He was the
best in the class, anyhow, because of his desire to be an officer.
Kai and Hanno knew nothing at all, and fared very badly in
Dr. Marotzke’s notebook.</p>

<p>And when the tests, recitation, and marking were over, the
interest in chemistry was about exhausted too. Dr. Marotzke
began to make a few experiments; there were a few pops, a
few coloured gases; but that was only to fill out the hour. He
dictated the next lesson; and then the third period, too, was a
thing of the past.</p>

<p>Everybody was in good spirits now—even Petersen, despite
the blow he had received. For the next hour was likely to be
a jolly one. Not a soul felt any qualms before it, and it even
promised occasion for entertainment and mischief. This was
English, with Candidate Modersohn, a young philologian who
had been for a few weeks on trial in the faculty—or, as Kai,
Count Mölln, put it, he was filling a limited engagement with
the company. There was little prospect, however, of his
being re-engaged. His classes were much too entertaining.</p>

<p>Some of the form remained in the chemistry hall, others
went up to the classroom; nobody needed to go down and
freeze in the courtyard, because Herr Modersohn was in
charge up in the corridors, and he never dared send any one
down. Moreover, there were preparations to be made for
his reception.</p>

<p>The room did not become in the least quieter when it rang
for the fourth hour. Everybody chattered and laughed and
prepared to see some fun. Count Mölln, his head in his
hands, went on reading Roderick Usher. Hanno was audience.
Some of the boys imitated the voices of animals;
there was the shrill crowing of a cock; and Wasservogel, in
the back row, grunted like a pig without anybody’s being able
to see that the noise came from his inside. On the blackboard
was a huge chalk drawing, a caricature, with squinting
eyes, drawn by Timm the rhapsodist. And when Herr Modersohn
entered he could not shut the door, even with the most
violent efforts, because there was a thick fir-cone in the crack;
Adolf Todtenhaupt had to take it away.</p>

<p>Candidate Modersohn was an undersized, insignificant
looking man. His face was always contorted with a sour,
peevish expression, and he walked with one shoulder thrust
forward. He was frightfully self-conscious, blinked, drew in
his breath, and kept opening his mouth as if he wanted to say
something if he could only think of it. Three steps from the
door he trod on a cracker of such exceptional quality that it
made a noise like dynamite. He jumped violently; then, in
these straits, he smiled exactly as though nothing had happened
and took his place before the middle row of benches,
stooping sideways, in his customary attitude, and resting one
palm on the desk in front of him. But this posture of his was
familiar to everybody; somebody had put some ink on the
right spot, and Herr Modersohn’s small clumsy hand got all
inky. He acted as though he had not noticed, laid his wet
black hand on his back, blinked, and said in a soft, weak
voice: “The order in the classroom leaves something to be
desired.”</p>

<p>Hanno Buddenbrook loved him in that moment, sat quite
still, and looked up into his worried, helpless face. But Wasservogel
grunted louder than ever, and a handful of peas went
rattling against the window and bounced back into the room.</p>

<p>“It’s hailing,” somebody said, quite loudly. Herr Modersohn
appeared to believe this, for he went without more ado
to the platform and asked for the register. He needed it to
call the names from, for, though he had been teaching the
class for five or six weeks, he hardly knew any of them by
name.</p>

<p>“Feddermann,” he said, “will you please recite the poem?”</p>

<p>“Absent,” shouted a chorus of voices. And there sat Feddermann,
large as life, in his place, shooting peas with great
skill and accuracy.</p>

<p>Herr Modersohn blinked again and selected a new name.
“Wasservogel,” he said.</p>

<p>“Dead,” shouted Petersen, attacked by a grim humour.
And the chorus, grunting, crowing, and with shouts of derision,
asseverated that Wasservogel was dead.</p>

<p>Herr Modersohn blinked afresh. He looked about him,
drew down his mouth, and put his finger on another name in
the register. “Perlemann,” he said, without much confidence.</p>

<p>“Unfortunately, gone mad,” uttered Kai, Count Mölln, with
great clarity and precision. And this also was confirmed by
the chorus amid an ever-increasing tumult.</p>

<p>Then Herr Modersohn stood up and shouted in to the hubbub:
“Buddenbrook, you will do me a hundred lines imposition.
If you laugh again, I shall be obliged to mark you.”</p>

<p>Then he sat down again. It was true that Hanno had
laughed. He had been seized by a quiet but violent spasm
of laughter, and went on because he could not stop. He had
found Kai’s joke so good—the “unfortunately” had especially
appealed to him. But he became quiet when Herr Modersohn
attacked him, and sat looking solemnly into the Candidate’s
face. He observed at that moment every detail of the man’s
appearance: saw every pathetic little hair in his scanty beard,
which showed the skin through it; saw his brown, empty,
disconsolate eyes; saw that he had on what appeared to be two
pairs of cuffs, because the sleeves of his shirt came down so
long; saw the whole pathetic, inadequate figure he made. He
saw more: he saw into the man’s inner self. Hanno Buddenbrook
was almost the only pupil whom Herr Modersohn knew
by name, and he availed himself of the knowledge to call him
constantly to order, give him impositions, and tyrannize over
him. He had distinguished Buddenbrook from the others
simply because of his quieter behaviour—and of this he took
advantage to make him feel his authority, an authority he did
not dare exert upon the real offenders. Hanno looked at him
and reflected that Herr Modersohn’s lack of fine feeling made
it almost impossible even to pity him! “I don’t bully you,”
he addressed the Candidate, in his thoughts: “I don’t share in
the general tormenting like the others—and how do you repay
me? But so it is, and so will it be, always and everywhere,”
he thought; and fear, and that sensation almost amounting to
physical nausea, rose again in him. “And the most dreadful
thing is that I can’t help seeing through you with such disgusting
clearness!”</p>

<p>At last Herr Modersohn found some one who was neither
dead nor crazy, and who would take it upon himself to repeat
the English verse. This was a poem called “The Monkey,”
a poor childish composition, required to be committed to memory
by these growing lads whose thoughts were already mostly
bent on business, on the sea, on the coming conflicts of actual
life.</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="first">“Monkey, little, merry fellow,</div>
<div class="verse">Thou art nature’s punchinello....”</div>
</div></div>

<p>There were endless verses—Kassbaum read them, quite
simply, out of his book. Nobody needed to trouble himself
about what Herr Modersohn thought. The noise grew worse
and worse, the feet shuffled and scraped on the dusty floor, the
cock crowed, the pig grunted, peas filled the air. The five-and-twenty
were drunk with disorder. And the unregulated
instincts of their years awoke. They drew obscene pictures
on pieces of paper, passed them about, and laughed at them
greedily.</p>

<p>All at once everything was still. The pupil who was then
reciting interrupted himself; even Herr Modersohn got up and
listened. They heard something charming: a pure, bell-like
sound, coming from the bottom of the room and flowing
sweetly, sensuously, with indescribably tender effect, on the
sudden silence. It was a music-box which somebody had
brought, playing “<i>Du, du, liegst mir am Herzen</i>” in the middle
of the English lesson. But precisely at that moment when the
little melody died away, something frightful ensued. It broke
like a sudden storm over the heads of the class, unexpected,
cruel, overwhelming, paralyzing.</p>

<p>Without anybody’s having knocked, the door opened wide
with a great shove, and a presence came in, high and huge,
growled, and stood with a single stride in front of the benches.
It was the Lord God.</p>

<p>Herr Modersohn grew ashy pale and dragged down the chair
from the platform, dusting it with his handkerchief. The
pupils had sprung up like one man. They pressed their arms
to their sides, stood on their tip-toes, bent their heads, and
bit their tongues in the fervour of their devotion. The deepest
silence reigned. Somebody gasped with the effort he made—then
all was still again.</p>

<p>Director Wulicke measured the saluting columns for a while
with his eye. He lifted his arm with its dirty funnel-shaped
cuff, and let it fall with the fingers spread out, as if he were
attacking a keyboard. “Sit down,” he said in his double-bass
voice.</p>

<p>The pupils sank back into their seats. Herr Modersohn
pulled up the chair with trembling hands, and the Director sat
down beside the dais. “Please proceed,” he said. That was
all, but it sounded as frightful as if the words he uttered had
been “Now we shall see, and woe to him who—”</p>

<p>The reason for his coming was clear. Herr Modersohn was
to give evidence of his ability to teach, to show what the lower
second had learned in the six or seven hours he had been with
them. It was a question of Herr Modersohn’s existence and
future. The Candidate was a sorry figure as he stood on the
platform and called again on somebody to recite “The Monkey.”
Up to now it had been only the pupils who were examined,
but now it was the master as well. Alas, it went
badly on both sides! Herr Director Wulicke’s appearance
was entirely unexpected, and only two or three of the pupils
were prepared. It was impossible for Herr Modersohn to
call up Adolf Todtenhaupt for the whole hour on end; after
“The Monkey” had been recited once, it could not be asked for
again, and so things were in a bad way. When the reading
from Ivanhoe began, young Count Mölln was the only person
who could translate it at all, he having a personal interest in
the novel. The others hemmed and hawed, stuttered, and got
hopelessly stuck. Hanno Buddenbrook was called up and
could not do a line. Director Wulicke gave utterance to a
sound that was as though the lowest string of his double-bass
had been violently plucked, and Herr Modersohn wrung
his small, clumsy, inky hands repeating plaintively over
and over. “And it went so well—it always went so well!”</p>

<p>He was still saying it, half to the pupils and half to the
Director, when the bell rang. But the Lord God stood erect
with folded arms before his chair and stared in front of him
over the heads of the class. Then he commanded that the
register be brought, and slowly marked down for laziness all
those pupils whose performances of the morning had been
deficient—or entirely lacking—six or seven marks at one fell
swoop. He could not put down a mark for Herr Modersohn,
but he was much worse than the others. He stood there with
a face like chalk, broken, done for. Hanno Buddenbrook
was among those marked down. And Director Wulicke said
besides, “I will spoil all your careers for you.” Then he
went.</p>

<p>The bell rang; class was over. It was always like that.
When you expected trouble it did not come. When you
thought all was well—then, the catastrophe. It was now impossible
for Hanno to go up at Easter. He rose from his seat
and went drearily out of the room, seeking the aching back
tooth with his tongue.</p>

<p>Kai came up to him and put his arm across his shoulders.
Together they walked down to the courtyard, among the crowd
of excited comrades, all of whom were discussing the extraordinary
event. He looked with loving anxiety into
Hanno’s face and said, “Please forgive, Hanno, for translating.
It would have been better to keep still and get a mark. It’s so
cheap—”</p>

<p>“Didn’t I say what ‘<i>patula Jovis arbore</i>’ meant?” answered
Hanno. “Don’t mind, Kai. That doesn’t matter. One just
mustn’t mind.”</p>

<p>“I suppose that’s true. Well, the Lord God is going to ruin
your career. You may as well resign yourself, Hanno, because
if it is His inscrutable will—. Career—what a lovely
word ‘career’ is! Herr Modersohn’s career is spoilt too. He
will never get to be a master, poor chap! There are assistant
masters, you may know, and there are head masters; but never
by any chance a plain master. This is a mystery not to be
revealed to youthful minds; it is only intended for grown-ups
and persons of mature experience. An ordinary intelligence
might say that either one is a master or one is not. I might
go up to the Lord God or Herr Marotzke and explain this to
him. But what would be the result? They would consider it
an insult, and I should be punished for insubordination—all
for having discovered for them a much higher significance in
their calling than they themselves were aware of! No, let’s
not talk about them—they’re all thick-skinned brutes!”</p>

<p>They walked about the court; Kai made jokes to help Hanno
forget his bad mark, and Hanno listened and enjoyed.</p>

<p>“Look, here is a door, an outer door. It is open, and outside
there is the street. How would it be if we were to go out
and take a little walk? It is recess, and we have still six
minutes. We could easily be back in time. But it is perfectly
impossible. You see what I mean? Here is the door. It is
open, there is no grating, there is nothing, nothing whatever to
prevent us. And yet it is impossible for us to step outside
for even a second—it is even impossible for us to think of
doing so. Well, let’s not think of it, then. Let’s take another
example: we don’t say, for instance, that it is nearly half-past
twelve. No, we say, ‘It’s nearly time for the geography
period’! You see? Now, I ask, is this any sort of a life to
lead? Everything is wrong. Oh, Lord, if the institution
would just once let us out of her loving embrace!”</p>

<p>“Well, and what then? No, Kai, we should just have to
do something then; here, at least we are taken care of. Since
my Father died Herr Stephan Kistenmaker and Pastor Pringsheim
have taken over the business of asking me every day
what I want to be. I don’t know. I can’t answer. I can’t be
anything. I’m afraid of everything—”</p>

<p>“How can anybody talk so dismally? What about your
music?”</p>

<p>“What about my music, Kai? There is nothing to it.
Shall I travel round and give concerts? In the first place,
they wouldn’t let me; and in the second place, I should never
really know enough. I can play very little. I can only improvise
a little when I am alone. And then, the travelling
about must be dreadful, I imagine. It is different with you.
You have more courage. You go about laughing at it all—you
have something to set against it. You want to write, to
tell wonderful stories. Well, that <i>is</i> something. You will
surely become famous, you are so clever. The thing is, you
are so much livelier. Sometimes in class we look at each
other, the way we did when Petersen got marked because he
read out of a crib, when all the rest of us did the same. The
same thought is in both our minds—but you know how to
make a face and let it pass. I can’t. I get so tired of things.
I’d like to sleep and never wake up. I’d like to die, Kai!
No, I am no good. I can’t want anything. I don’t even want
to be famous. I’m afraid of it, just as much as if it were a
wrong thing to do. Nothing can come of me, that is perfectly
sure. One day, after confirmation-class, I heard Pastor
Pringsheim tell somebody that one must just give me up, because
I come of a decayed family.”</p>

<p>“Did he say that?” Kai asked with deep interest.</p>

<p>“Yes; he meant my Uncle Christian, in the institution in
Hamburg. One must just give me up—oh, I’d be so happy
if they would! I have so many worries; everything is so hard
for me. If I give myself a little cut or bruise anywhere, and
make a wound that would heal in a week with anybody else,
it takes a month with me. It gets inflamed and infected and
makes me all sorts of trouble. Herr Brecht told me lately that
all my teeth are in a dreadful condition—not to mention the
ones that have been pulled already. If they are like that now,
what will they be when I am thirty or forty years old? I
am completely discouraged.”</p>

<p>“Oh, come,” Kai said, and struck into a livelier gait.
“Now you must tell me something about your playing. I want
to write something marvellous—perhaps I’ll begin it to-day,
in drawing period. Will you play this afternoon?”</p>

<p>Hanno was silent a moment. A flush came upon his face,
and a painful, confused look.</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ll play—I suppose—though I ought not. I ought
to practise my sonatas and études and then stop. But I suppose
I’ll play; I cannot help it, though it only makes everything
worse.”</p>

<p>“Worse?”</p>

<p>Hanno was silent.</p>

<p>“I know what you mean,” said Kai after a bit, and then
neither of the lads spoke again.</p>

<p>They were both at the same difficult age. Kai’s face burned,
and he cast down his eyes. Hanno looked pale and serious;
his eyes had clouded over, and he kept giving sideways glances.</p>

<p>Then the bell rang, and they went up.</p>

<p>The geography period came next, and an important test on
the kingdom of Hesse-Nassau. A man with a red beard and
brown tail-coat came in. His face was pale, and his hands
were very full of pores, but without a single hair. This was
“the clever one,” Dr. Mühsam. He suffered from occasional
haemorrhages, and always spoke in an ironic tone, because it
was his pose to be considered as witty as he was ailing. He
possessed a Heine collection, a quantity of papers and objects
connected with that cynical and sickly poet. He proceeded to
mark the boundaries of Hesse-Nassau on the map that hung on
the wall, and then asked, with a melancholy, mocking smile,
if the gentlemen would indicate in their books the important
features of the country. It was as though he meant to make
game of the class and of Hesse-Nassau as well; yet this was an
important test, and much dreaded by the entire form.</p>

<p>Hanno Buddenbrook knew next to nothing about Hesse-Nassau.
He tried to look on Adolf Todtenhaupt’s book; but
Heinrich Heine, who had a penetrating observation despite
his suffering, melancholy air, pounced on him at once and
said: “Herr Buddenbrook, I am tempted to ask you to close
your book, but that I suspect you would be glad to have me do
so. Go on with your work.”</p>

<p>The remark contained two witticisms. First, that Dr.
Mühsam addressed Hanno as Herr Buddenbrook, and, second,
that about the copy-book. Hanno continued to brood over
his book, and handed it in almost empty when he went out
with Kai.</p>

<p>The difficulties were now over with for the day. The fortunate
ones who had come through without marks, had light
and easy consciences, and life seemed like play to them as
they betook themselves to the large well-lighted room where
they might sit and draw under the supervision of Herr Drägemüller.
Plaster casts from the antique stood about the room,
and there was a great cupboard containing divers pieces of
wood and doll-furniture which served as models. Herr
Drägemüller was a thick-set man with a full round beard
and a smooth, cheap brown wig which stood out in the back
of the neck and betrayed itself. He possessed two wigs, one
with longer hair, the other with shorter; if he had had his
beard cut he would don the shorter wig as well. He was a
man with some droll peculiarities of speech. For instance,
he called a lead pencil a “lead.” He gave out an oily-alcoholic
odour; and it was said of him that he drank petroleum.
It always delighted him to have an opportunity to take
a class in something besides drawing. On such occasions
he would lecture on the policy of Bismarck, accompanying
himself with impressive spiral gestures from his nose to his
shoulder. Social democracy was his bugbear—he spoke of it
with fear and loathing. “We must keep together,” he used
to say to refractory pupils, pinching them on the arm.
“Social democracy is at the door!” He was possessed by a
sort of spasmodic activity: would sit down next a pupil,
exhaling a strong spirituous odour, tap him on the forehead
with his seal ring, shoot out certain isolated words and phrases
like “Perspective! Light and shade! The lead! Social
democracy! Stick together!”—and then dash off again.</p>

<p>Kai worked at his new literary project during this period,
and Hanno occupied himself with conducting, in fancy, an
overture with full orchestra. Then school was over, they
fetched down their things, the gate was opened, they were free
to pass, and they went home.</p>

<p>Hanno and Kai went the same road together as far as the
little red villa, their books under their arms. Young Count
Mölln had a good distance farther to go alone before he
reached the paternal dwelling. He never wore an overcoat.</p>

<p>The morning’s fog had turned to snow, which came down in
great white flocks and rapidly became slush. They parted at
the Buddenbrook gate; but when Hanno was half-way up the
garden Kai came back to put his arm about his neck. “Don’t
give up—better not play!” he said gently. Then his slender,
careless figure disappeared in the whirling snow.</p>

<p>Hanno put down his books on the bear’s tray in the corridor
and went into the living-room to see his mother. She sat on
the sofa reading a book with a yellow paper cover, and looked
up as he crossed the room. She gazed at him with her brown,
close-set, blue-shadowed eyes; as he stood before her, she took
his head in both her hands and kissed him on the brow.</p>

<p>He went upstairs, where Fräulein Clementine had some
luncheon ready for him, washed, and ate. When he was done
he took out of his desk a packet of little biting Russian cigarettes
and began to smoke. He was no stranger to their use
by now. Then he sat down at the harmonium and played
something from Bach: something very severe and difficult, in
fugue form. At length he clasped his hands behind his head
and looked out the window at the snow noiselessly tumbling
down. Nothing else was to be seen; for there was no longer
a charming little garden with a plashing fountain beneath his
window. The view was cut off by the grey side-wall of the
neighbouring villa.</p>

<p>Dinner was at four o’clock, and Hanno, his mother, and
Fräulein Clementine sat down to it. Afterward Hanno saw
that there were preparations for music in the salon, and
awaited his mother at the piano. They played the Sonata
Opus 24 of Beethoven. In the adagio the violin sang like an
angel; but Gerda took the instrument from her chin with a
dissatisfied air, looked at it in irritation, and said it was not
in time. She played no more, but went up to rest.</p>

<p>Hanno remained in the salon. He went to the glass door
that led out on the small verandah and looked into the
drenched garden. But suddenly he took a step back and
jerked the cream-coloured curtains across the door, so that
the room lay in a soft yellow twilight. Then he went to the
piano. He stood for a while, and his gaze, directed fixed and
unseeing upon a distant point, altered slowly, grew blurred
and vague and shadowy. He sat down at the instrument and
began to improvise.</p>

<p>It was a simple <i>motif</i> which he employed—a mere trifle,
an unfinished fragment of melody in one bar and a half. He
brought it out first, with unsuspected power, in the bass, as a
single voice: indicating it as the source and fount of all that
was to come, and announcing it, with a commanding entry,
by a burst of trumpets. It was not quite easy to grasp his
intention; but when he repeated and harmonized it in the
treble, with a timbre like dull silver, it proved to consist essentially
of a single resolution, a yearning and painful melting
of one tone into another—a short-winded, pitiful invention,
which nevertheless gained a strange, mysterious, and significant
value precisely by means of the meticulous and solemn
precision with which it was defined and produced. And
now there began more lively passages, a restless coming and
going of syncopated sound, seeking, wandering, torn by
shrieks like a soul in unrest and tormented by some knowledge
it possesses and cannot conceal, but must repeat in
ever different harmonies, questioning, complaining, protesting,
demanding, dying away. The syncopation increased,
grew more pronounced, driven hither and thither by scampering
triplets; the shrieks of fear recurred, they took form
and became melody. There was a moment when they dominated,
in a mounting, imploring chorus of wind-instruments
that conquered the endlessly thronging, welling, wandering,
vanishing harmonies, and swelled out in unmistakable simple
rhythms—a crushed, childlike, imposing, imploring chorale.
This concluded with a sort of ecclesiastical cadence. A
<i>fermate</i> followed, a silence. And then, quite softly, in a
timbre of dull silver, there came the first <i>motif</i> again, the
paltry invention, a figure either tiresome or obscure, a sweet,
sentimental dying-away of one tone into another. This was
followed by a tremendous uproar, a wild activity, punctuated
by notes like fanfares, expressive of violent resolve.
What was coming? Then came horns again, sounding the
march; there was an assembling, a concentrating, firm, consolidated
rhythms; and a new figure began, a bold improvisation,
a sort of lively, stormy hunting song. There was no
joy in this hunting song; its note was one of defiant despair.
Signals sounded through it; yet they were not only signals
but cries of fear; while throughout, winding through it all,
through all the writhen, bizarre harmonies, came again that
mysterious first <i>motif</i>, wandering in despair, torturingly sweet.
And now began a ceaseless hurry of events whose sense and
meaning could not be guessed, a restless flood of sound-adventures,
rhythms, harmonies, welling up uncontrolled from
the keyboard, as they shaped themselves under Hanno’s labouring
fingers. He experienced them, as it were; he did not
know them beforehand. He sat a little bent over the keys,
with parted lips and deep, far gaze, his brown hair covering
his forehead with its soft curls. What was the meaning of
what he played? Were these images of fearful difficulties
surmounted flames passed through and torrents swum, castles
stormed and dragons slain? But always—now like a yelling
laugh, now like an ineffably sweet promise—the original
<i>motif</i> wound through it all, the pitiful phrase with its notes
melting into one another! Now the music seemed to rouse
itself to new and gigantic efforts: wild runs in octaves followed,
sounding like shrieks; an irresistible mounting, a
chromatic upward struggle, a wild relentless longing, abruptly
broken by startling, arresting pianissimi which gave a sensation
as if the ground were disappearing from beneath one’s
feet, or like a sudden abandonment and sinking into a gulf
of desire. Once, far off and softly warning, sounded the
first chords of the imploring prayer; but the flood of rising
cacophonies overwhelmed them with their rolling, streaming,
clinging, sinking, and struggling up again, as they fought on
toward the end that must come, must come this very moment,
at the height of this fearful climax—for the pressure of longing
had become intolerable. And it came; it could no longer
be kept back—those spasms of yearning could not be prolonged.
And it came as though curtains were rent apart,
doors sprang open, thorn-hedges parted of themselves, walls
of flame sank down. The resolution, the redemption, the
complete fulfilment—a chorus of jubilation burst forth, and
everything resolved itself in a harmony—and the harmony,
in sweet <i>ritardando</i>, at once sank into another. It was the
<i>motif</i>, the <i>first motif</i>! And now began a festival, a triumph,
an unbounded orgy of this very figure, which now displayed
a wealth of dynamic colour which passed through every
octave, wept and shivered in tremolo, sang, rejoiced, and
sobbed in exultation, triumphantly adorned with all the bursting,
tinkling, foaming, purling resources of orchestral pomp.
The fanatical worship of this worthless trifle, this scrap of
melody, this brief, childish harmonic invention only a bar
and a half in length, had about it something stupid and
gross, and at the same time something ascetic and religious—something
that contained the essence of faith and renunciation.
There was a quality of the perverse in the insatiability
with which it was produced and revelled in: there was a sort
of cynical despair; there was a longing for joy, a yielding
to desire, in the way the last drop of sweetness was, as it were,
extracted from the melody, till exhaustion, disgust, and satiety
supervened. Then, at last; at last, in the weariness after
excess, a long, soft arpeggio in the minor trickled through,
mounted a tone, resolved itself in the major, and died in
mournful lingering away.</p>

<p>Hanno sat still a moment, his chin on his breast, his hands
in his lap. Then he got up and closed the instrument. He
was very pale, there was no strength in his knees, and his
eyes were burning. He went into the next room, stretched
himself on the chaise-lounge, and remained for a long time
motionless.</p>

<p>Later there was supper, and he played a game of chess with
his mother, at which neither side won. But until after midnight
he still sat in his room, before his harmonium, and
played—played in thought only, for he must make no noise.
He did this despite his firm intention to get up the next morning
at half-past five, to do some most necessary preparation.</p>

<p>This was one day in the life of little Johann.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER III</h3>
</div>

<p><span class="smcap">Cases</span> of typhoid fever take the following course.</p>

<p>The patient feels depressed and moody—a condition which
grows rapidly worse until it amounts to acute despondency.
At the same time he is overpowered by physical weariness,
not only of the muscles and sinews, but also of the organic
functions, in particular of the digestion—so that the stomach
refuses food. There is a great desire for sleep, but even in
conditions of extreme fatigue the sleep is restless and superficial
and not refreshing. There is pain in the head, the
brain feels dull and confused, and there are spells of giddiness.
An indefinite ache is felt in all the bones. There is
blood from the nose now and then, without apparent cause.— This
is the onset.</p>

<p>Then comes a violent chill which seizes the whole body
and makes the teeth chatter; the fever sets in, and is immediately
at its height. Little red spots appear on the breast
and abdomen, about the size of a lentil. They go away when
pressed by the finger, but return at once. The pulse is unsteady;
there are about a hundred pulsations to the minute.
The temperature goes up to 104°. Thus passes the first week.</p>

<p>In the second week the patient is free from pain in the
head and limbs; but the giddiness is distinctly worse, and
there is so much humming in the ears that he is practically
deaf. The facial expression becomes dull, the mouth stands
open, the eyes are without life. The consciousness is
blurred, desire for sleep takes entire possession of the patient,
and he often sinks, not into actual sleep, but into a leaden
lethargy. At other intervals there are the loud and excited
ravings of delirium. The patient’s helplessness is complete,
and his uncleanliness becomes repulsive. His gums, teeth,
and tongue are covered with a blackish deposit which makes
his breath foul. He lies motionless on his back, with distended
abdomen. He has sunk down in the bed, with his
knees wide apart. Pulse and breathing are rapid, jerky,
superficial and laboured; the pulse is fluttering, and gallops
one hundred and twenty to the minute. The eyelids are
half-closed, the cheeks are no longer glowing, but have assumed
a bluish colour. The red spots on breast and abdomen
are more numerous. The temperature reaches 105.8°.</p>

<p>In the third week the weakness is at its height. The patient
raves no longer: who can say whether his spirit is sunk in
empty night or whether it lingers, remote from the flesh, in
far, deep, quiet dreams, of which he gives no sound and no
sign? He lies in total insensibility. This is the crisis of
the disease.</p>

<p>In individual cases the diagnosis is sometimes rendered
more difficult; as, for example, when the early symptoms—depression,
weariness, lack of appetite, headache and unquiet
sleep—are nearly all present while the patient is still
going about in his usual health; when they are scarcely
noticeable as anything out of the common, even if they are
suddenly and definitely increased. But a clever doctor, of
real scientific acumen—like, for example, Dr. Langhals,
the good-looking Dr. Langhals with the small, hairy hands—will
still be in a position to call the case by its right name;
and the appearance of the red spots on the chest and abdomen
will be conclusive evidence that his diagnosis was correct.
He will know what measures to take and what remedies to
apply. He will arrange for a large, well-aired room, the
temperature of which must not be higher than 70°. He will
insist on absolute cleanliness, and by means of frequent shifting
and changes of linen will keep the patient free from bedsores—if
possible; in some cases it is not possible. He will
have the mouth frequently cleansed with moist linen rags.
As for treatment, preparations of iodine, potash, quinine,
and antipyrin are indicated—with a diet as light and nourishing
as possible, for the patient’s stomach and bowels are
profoundly attacked by the disease. He will treat the consuming
fever by means of frequent baths, into which the
patient will often be put every three hours, day and night,
cooling them gradually from the foot end of the tub, and
always, after each bath, administering something stimulating,
like brandy or champagne.</p>

<p>But all these remedies he uses entirely at random, in the
hope that they may be of some use in the case; ignorant
whether any one of them will have the slightest effect. For
there is one thing which he does not know at all; with respect
to one fact, he labours in complete darkness. Up to the
third week, up to the very crisis of the disease, he cannot possibly
tell whether this illness, which he calls typhoid, is an
unfortunate accident, the disagreeable consequence of an infection
which might perhaps have been avoided, and which can
be combated with the resources of medical science; or whether
it is, quite simply, a form of dissolution, the garment, as it
were, of death. And then, whether death choose to assume
this form or another is all the same—against him there is
no remedy.</p>

<p>Cases of typhoid take the following course:</p>

<p>When the fever is at its height, life calls to the patient:
calls out to him as he wanders in his distant dream, and
summons him in no uncertain voice. The harsh, imperious
call reaches the spirit on that remote path that leads into the
shadows, the coolness and peace. He hears the call of life,
the clear, fresh, mocking summons to return to that distant
scene which he has already left so far behind him, and already
forgotten. And there may well up in him something like a
feeling of shame for a neglected duty; a sense of renewed
energy, courage, and hope; he may recognize a bond existing
still between him and that stirring, colourful, callous existence
which he thought he had left so far behind him. Then, however
far he may have wandered on his distant path, he will
turn back—and live. But if he shudders when he hears life’s
voice, if the memory of that vanished scene and the sound of
that lusty summons make him shake his head, make him put
out his hand to ward it off as he flies forward in the way of
escape that has opened to him—then it is clear that the patient
will die.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

<div class="chapter">


<h3 class="nobreak">CHAPTER IV</h3>
</div>

<p>“<span class="smcap">It</span> is not right, it is not right, Gerda,” said old Fräulein
Weichbrodt, perhaps for the hundredth time. Her voice was
full of reproach and distress. She had a sofa place to-day
in the circle that sat round the centre-table in the drawing-room
of her former pupil. Gerda Buddenbrook, Frau
Permaneder, her daughter Erica, poor Clothilde, and the three
Misses Buddenbrook made up the group. The green cap-strings
still fell down upon the old lady’s childish shoulders;
but she had grown so tiny, with her seventy-five years of life,
that she could scarcely raise her elbow high enough to gesticulate
above the surface of the table.</p>

<p>“No, it is not right, and so I tell you, Gerda,” she repeated.
She spoke with such warmth that her voice trembled. “I
have one foot in the grave, my time is short—and you can
think of leaving me—of leaving us all—for ever! If it were
just a visit to Amsterdam that you were thinking of—but to
leave us for ever—!” She shook her bird-like old head vigorously,
and her brown eyes were clouded with her distress.
“It is true, you have lost a great deal—”</p>

<p>“No, she has not lost a great deal, she has lost everything,”
said Frau Permaneder. “We must not be selfish, Therese.
Gerda wishes to go, and she is going—that is all. She came
with Thomas, one-and-twenty years ago; and we all loved her,
though she very likely didn’t like any of us.—No, you didn’t,
Gerda; don’t deny it!—But Thomas is no more—and nothing
is any more. What are we to her? Nothing. We feel it
very much, we cannot help feeling it; but yet I say, go, with
God’s blessing, Gerda, and thanks for not going before, when
Thomas died.”</p>

<p>It was an autumn evening, after supper. Little Johann
(Justus, Johann, Kaspar) had been lying for nearly six
months, equipped with the blessing of Pastor Pringsheim,
out there at the edge of the little grove, beneath the sandstone
cross, beneath the family arms. The rain rustled the
half-leafless trees in the avenue, and sometimes gusts of wind
drove it against the window-panes. All eight ladies were
dressed in black.</p>

<p>The little family had gathered to take leave of Gerda
Buddenbrook, who was about to leave the town and return
to Amsterdam, to play duets once more with her old father.
No duties now restrained her. Frau Permaneder could no
longer oppose her decision. She said it was right, she knew
it must be so; but in her heart she mourned over her sister-in-law’s
departure. If the Senator’s widow had remained in
the town, and kept her station and her place in society, and
left her property where it was, there would still have remained
a little prestige to the family name. But let that be as it must,
Frau Antonie was determined to hold her head high while
she lived and there were people to look at her. Had not
her grandfather driven with four horses all over the country?</p>

<p>Despite the stormy life that lay behind her, and despite
her weak digestion, she did not look her fifty years. Her
skin was a little faded and downy, and a few hairs grew on
her upper lip—the pretty upper lip of Tony Buddenbrook.
But there was not a white hair in the smooth coiffure beneath
the mourning cap.</p>

<p>Poor Clothilde bore up under the departure of her relative,
as one must bear up under the afflictions of this life.
She took it with patience and tranquillity. She had done
wonders at the supper table, and now she sat among the others,
lean and grey as of yore, and her words were drawling and
friendly.</p>

<p>Erica Weinschenk, now thirty-one years old, was likewise
not one to excite herself unduly over her aunt’s departure.
She had lived through worse things, and had early learned
resignation. Submission was her strongest characteristic:
one read it in her weary light-blue eyes—the eyes of Bendix
Grünlich—and heard it in the tones of her patient, sometimes
plaintive voice.</p>

<p>The three Misses Buddenbrook, Uncle Gotthold’s daughters,
wore their old affronted and critical air; Friederike and
Henriette, the eldest, had grown leaner and more angular with
the years; while Pfiffi, the youngest, now fifty-three years old,
was much too little and fat.</p>

<p>Old Frau Consul Kröger, Uncle Justus’ widow, had been
asked too, but she was rather ailing—or perhaps she had no
suitable gown to put on: one couldn’t tell which.</p>

<p>They talked about Gerda’s journey and the train she was
to take; about the sale of the villa and its furnishings, which
Herr Gosch had undertaken. For Gerda was taking nothing
with her—she was going away as she had come.</p>

<p>Then Frau Permaneder began to talk about life. She was
very serious and made observations upon the past and the
future—though of the future there was in truth almost nothing
to be said.</p>

<p>“When I am dead,” she declared, “Erica may move away if
she likes. But as for me, I cannot live anywhere else; and
so long as I am on earth, we will come together here, we who
are left. Once a week you will come to dinner with me—and
we will read the family papers.” She put her hand on the
portfolio that lay before her on the table. “Yes, Gerda, I
will take them over, and be glad to have them. Well, that is
settled. Do you hear, Tilda? Though it might exactly as
well be you who should invite us, for you are just as well off
as we are now. Yes—so it goes. I’ve struggled against fate,
and done my best, and you have just sat there and waited for
everything to come round. But you are a goose, you know,
all the same—please don’t mind if I say so—”</p>

<p>“Oh, Tony,” Clothilde said, smiling.</p>

<p>“I am sorry I cannot say good-bye to Christian,” said
Gerda, and the talk turned aside to that subject. There was
small prospect of his ever coming out of the institution in
which he was confined, although he was probably not too bad
to go about in freedom. But the present state of things was
very agreeable for his wife. She was, Frau Permaneder asserted,
in league with the doctor; and Christian would, in all
probability, end his days where he was.</p>

<p>There was a pause. They touched delicately and with hesitation
upon recent events, and when one of them let fall little
Johann’s name, it was still in the room, except for the sound
of the rain, which fell faster than before.</p>

<p>This silence lay like a heavy secret over the events of
Hanno’s last illness. It must have been a frightful onslaught.
They did not look in each other’s eyes as they talked; their
voices were hushed, and their words were broken. But they
spoke of one last episode—the visit of the little ragged count
who had almost forced his way to Hanno’s bedside. Hanno
had smiled when he heard his voice, though he hardly knew
any one; and Kai had kissed his hands again and again.</p>

<p>“He kissed his hands?” asked the Buddenbrook ladies.</p>

<p>“Yes, over and over.”</p>

<p>They all thought for a while of this strange thing, and then
suddenly Frau Permaneder burst into tears.</p>

<p>“I loved him so much,” she sobbed. “You don’t any of you
know how much—more than any of you—yes, forgive me,
Gerda—you are his mother.—Oh, he was an angel.”</p>

<p>“He is an angel, now,” corrected Sesemi.</p>

<p>“Hanno, little Hanno,” went on Frau Permaneder, the tears
flowing down over her soft faded cheeks. “Tom, Father,
Grandfather, and all the rest! Where are they? We shall
see them no more. Oh, it is so sad, so hard!”</p>

<p>“There will be a reunion,” said Friederike Buddenbrook.
She folded her hands in her lap, cast down her eyes, and put
her nose in the air.</p>

<p>“Yes—they say so.—Oh, there are times, Friederike, when
that is no consolation, God forgive me! When one begins
to doubt—doubt justice and goodness—and everything. Life
crushes so much in us, it destroys so many of our beliefs—!
A reunion—if that were so—”</p>

<p>But now Sesemi Weichbrodt stood up, as tall as ever she
could. She stood on tip-toe, rapped on the table; the cap
shook on her old head.</p>

<p>“It <i>is so</i>!” she said, with her whole strength; and looked at
them all with a challenge in her eyes.</p>

<p>She stood there, a victor in the good fight which all her
life she had waged against the assaults of Reason: hump-backed,
tiny, quivering with the strength of her convictions,
a little prophetess, admonishing and inspired.</p>
