<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>Herr Jean Jacques Hoffstede was the town poet. He undoubtedly had a few verses in his pocket for the present occasion. He was nearly as old as Johann Buddenbrook, and dressed in much the same style except that his coat was green instead of mouse-coloured. But he was thinner and more active than his old friend, with bright little greenish eyes and a long pointed nose.</p>
			<p>вҖңMany thanks,вҖқ he said, shaking hands with the gentlemen and bowing before the ladiesвҒ вҖ”especially the Frau Consul, for whom he entertained a deep regard. Such bows as his it was not given to the younger generation to perform; and he accompanied them with his pleasant quiet smile. вҖңMany thanks for your kind invitation, my dear good people. We met these two young ones, the Doctor and IвҖқвҒ вҖ”he pointed to Tom and Christian, in their blue tunics and leather beltsвҒ вҖ”вҖңin King Street, coming home from school. Fine lads, eh, Frau Consul? Tom is a very solid chap. HeвҖҷll have to go into the business, no doubt of that. But Christian is a devil of a fellowвҒ вҖ”a young <i xml:lang="fr">incroyable</i>, hey? I will not conceal my <i xml:lang="fr">engouement</i>. He must study, I thinkвҒ вҖ”he is witty and brilliant.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Old Buddenbrook used his gold snuffbox. вҖңHeвҖҷs a young monkey, thatвҖҷs what he is. Why not say at once that he is to be a poet, Hoffstede?вҖқ</p>
			<p>Mamsell Jungmann drew the curtains, and soon the room was bathed in mellow flickering light from the candles in the crystal chandelier and the sconces on the writing-desk. It lighted up golden gleams in the Frau ConsulвҖҷs hair.</p>
			<p>вҖңWell, Christian,вҖқ she said, вҖңwhat did you learn today?вҖқ It appeared that Christian had had writing, arithmetic, and singing lessons. He was a boy of seven, who already resembled his father to an almost comic extent. He had the same rather small round deep-set eyes and the same prominent aquiline nose; the lines of his face below the cheekbones showed that it would not always retain its present childlike fullness.</p>
			<p>вҖңWeвҖҷve been laughing dreadfully,вҖқ he began to prattle, his eyes darting from one to another of the circle. вҖңWhat do you think Herr Stengel said to Siegmund Kostermann?вҖқ He bent his back, shook his head, and declaimed impressively: вҖңвҖҠвҖҳOutwardly, outwardly, my dear child, you are sleek and smooth; but inwardly, my dear child, you are black and foul.вҖҷвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ He mimicked with indescribably funny effect not only the masterвҖҷs odd pronunciation but the look of disgust on his face at the вҖңoutward sleeknessвҖқ he described. The whole company burst out laughing.</p>
			<p>вҖңYoung monkey!вҖқ repeated old Buddenbrook. But Herr Hoffstede was in ecstasies. вҖң<i xml:lang="fr">Charmant!</i>вҖқ he cried. вҖңIf you know Marcellus StengelвҒ вҖ”thatвҖҷs he, to the life. Oh, thatвҖҷs too good!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Thomas, to whom the gift of mimicry had been denied, stood near his younger brother and laughed heartily, without a trace of envy. His teeth were not very good, being small and yellowish. His nose was finely chiselled, and he strikingly resembled his grandfather in the eyes and the shape of the face.</p>
			<p>The company had for the most part seated themselves on the chairs and the sofa. They talked with the children or discussed the unseasonable cold and the new house. Herr Hoffstede admired a beautiful SГЁvres inkstand, in the shape of a black and white hunting dog, that stood on the secretary. Doctor Grabow, a man of about the ConsulвҖҷs age, with a long mild face between thin whiskers, was looking at the table, set out with cakes and currant bread and saltcellars in different shapes. This was the вҖңbread and saltвҖқ that had been sent by friends for the housewarming; but the вҖңbreadвҖқ consisted of rich, heavy pastries, and the salt came in dishes of massive gold, that the senders might not seem to be mean in their gifts.</p>
			<p>вҖңThere will be work for me here,вҖқ said the Doctor, pointing to the sweetmeats and threatening the children with his glance. Shaking his head, he picked up a heavy salt and pepper stand from the table.</p>
			<p>вҖңFrom Lebrecht KrГ¶ger,вҖқ said old Buddenbrook, with a grimace. вҖңOur dear kinsman is always openhanded. I did not spend as much on him when he built his summer house outside the Castle Gate. But he has always been like thatвҒ вҖ”very lordly, very free with his money, a real cavalier Г -la-mode.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>The bell had rung several times. Pastor Wunderlich was announced; a stout old gentleman in a long black coat and powdered hair. He had twinkling grey eyes set in a face that was jovial if rather pale. He had been a widower for many years, and considered himself a bachelor of the old school, like Herr Gratjens, the broker, who entered with him. Herr Gratjens was a tall man who went around with one of his thin hands up to his eye like a telescope, as if he were examining a painting. He was a well-known art connoisseur.</p>
			<p>Among the other guests were Senator Doctor Langhals and his wife, both friends of many yearsвҖҷ standing; and KГ¶ppen the wine-merchant, with his great crimson face between enormous padded sleeves. His wife, who came with him, was nearly as stout as he.</p>
			<p>It was after half-past four when the KrГ¶gers put in an appearanceвҒ вҖ”the elders together with their children; the Consul KrГ¶gers with their sons Jacob and JГјrgen, who were about the age of Tom and Christian. On their heels came the parents of Frau Consul KrГ¶ger, the lumber-dealer Г–verdieck and his wife, a fond old pair who still addressed each other in public with nicknames from the days of their early love.</p>
			<p>вҖңFine people come late,вҖқ said Consul Buddenbrook, and kissed his mother-in-lawвҖҷs hand.</p>
			<p>вҖңBut look at them when they do come!вҖқ and Johann Buddenbrook included the whole KrГ¶ger connection with a sweeping gesture, and shook the elder KrГ¶ger by the hand. Lebrecht KrГ¶ger, the cavalier Г -la-mode, was a tall, distinguished figure. He wore his hair slightly powdered, but dressed in the height of fashion, with a double row of jewelled buttons on his velvet waistcoat. His son Justus, with his turned-up mustache and small beard, was very like the father in figure and manner, even to the graceful easy motions of the hands.</p>
			<p>The guests did not sit down, but stood about awaiting the principal event of the evening and passing the time in casual talk. At length, Johann Buddenbrook the older offered his arm to Madame KГ¶ppen and said in an elevated voice, вҖңWell, <i xml:lang="fr">mesdames et messieurs</i>, if you are hungry.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>Mamsell Jungmann and the servant had opened the folding doors into the dining-room; and the company made its way with studied ease to table. One could be sure of a good square meal at the BuddenbrooksвҖҷ.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
