<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
			<p>“<span class="smcap">I entirely</span> agree with you, my good friend. This important matter must be settled. In short, then: the usual dowry of a young girl of our family is seventy thousand marks.”</p>
			<p>Herr Grünlich cast at his future father-in-law a shrewd, calculating glance⁠—the glance of the genuine man of business.</p>
			<p>“As a matter of fact,” he said⁠—and this “matter of fact” was of precisely the same length as his left-hand whisker, which he was drawing reflectively through his fingers; he let go of the end just as “of fact” was finished.</p>
			<p>“You know, my honoured father,” he began again, “the deep respect I have for traditions and principles. Only⁠—in the present case is not this consideration for the tradition a little exaggerated? A business increases⁠—a family prospers⁠—in short, conditions change and improve.”</p>
			<p>“My good friend,” said the Consul, “you see in me a fair-dealing merchant. You have not let me finish, or you would have heard that I am ready and willing to meet you in the circumstances, and add ten thousand marks to the seventy thousand without more ado.”</p>
			<p>“Eighty thousand, then,” said Herr Grünlich, making motions with his mouth, as though to say: “Not <i>too</i> much; but it will do.”</p>
			<p>Thus they came to an affectionate settlement; the Consul jingled his keys like a man satisfied as he got up. And, in fact, his satisfaction was justified; for it was only with the eighty thousand marks that they had arrived at the dowry traditional in the family.</p>
			<p>Herr Grünlich now said good-bye and departed for Hamburg. Tony as yet realized but little of her new estate. She still went to dances at the Möllendorpfs’, Kistenmakers’, and Langhals’, and in her own home; she skated on the Burgfield and the meadows of the Trave, and permitted the attentions of the young gentlemen of the town. In the middle of October she went to the betrothal feast at the Möllendorpfs’ for the oldest son of the house and Juliet Hagenström. “Tom,” she said, “I won’t go. It is disgusting.” But she went, and enjoyed herself hugely. And, as for the rest, by the entry with the pen in the family history-book, she had won the privilege of going, with the Frau Consul or alone, into all the shops in town and making purchases in a grand style for her trousseau. It was to be a brilliant trousseau. Two seamstresses sat all day in the breakfast-room window, sewing, embroidering monograms, and eating quantities of house-bread and green cheese.</p>
			<p>“Is the linen come from Lentföhr, Mamma?”</p>
			<p>“No, but here are two dozen tea-serviettes.”</p>
			<p>“That is nice. But he promised it by this afternoon. My goodness, the sheets still have to be hemmed.”</p>
			<p>“Mamsell Bitterlich wants to know about the lace for the pillow-cases, Ida.”</p>
			<p>“It is in the right-hand cupboard in the entry, Tony, my child.”</p>
			<p>“Line⁠—!”</p>
			<p>“You could go yourself, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, if I’m marrying for the privilege of running up and down stairs⁠—!”</p>
			<p>“Have you made up your mind yet about the material for the wedding-dress, Tony?”</p>
			<p>“Moiré antique, Mamma⁠—I won’t marry without moiré antique!”</p>
			<p>So passed October and November. At Christmas time Herr Grünlich appeared, to spend Christmas in the Buddenbrook family circle and also to take part in the celebration at the Krögers’. His conduct toward his bride showed all the delicacy one would have expected from him. No unnecessary formality, no importunity, no tactless tenderness. A light, discreet kiss upon the forehead, in the presence of the parents, sealed the betrothal. Tony sometimes puzzled over this, the least in the world. Why, she wondered, did his present happiness seem not quite commensurate with the despair into which her refusal had thrown him? He regarded her with the air of a satisfied possessor. Now and then, indeed, if they happened to be alone, a jesting and teasing mood seemed to overcome him; once he attempted to fall on his knees and approach his whiskers to her face, while he asked in a voice apparently trembling with joy, “Have I indeed captured you? Have I won you for my own?” To which Tony answered, “You are forgetting yourself,” and got away with all possible speed.</p>
			<p>Soon after the holidays Herr Grünlich went back to Hamburg, for his flourishing business demanded his personal attention; and the Buddenbrooks agreed with him that Tony had had time enough before the betrothal to make his acquaintance.</p>
			<p>The question of a house was quickly arranged. Tony, who looked forward extravagantly to life in a large city, had expressed the wish to settle in Hamburg itself, and indeed in the Spitalstrasse, where Herr Grünlich’s office was. But the bridegroom, by manly persistence, won her over to the purchase of a villa outside the city, near Eimsbüttel, a romantic and retired spot, an ideal nest for a newly-wedded pair⁠—“<i>procul negotiis</i>.”⁠—Ah, he had not yet forgotten quite all his Latin!</p>
			<p>Thus December passed, and at the beginning of the year ’46 the wedding was celebrated. There was a splendid wedding feast, to which half the town was bidden. Tony’s friends⁠—among them Armgard von Schilling, who arrived in a towering coach⁠—danced with Tom’s and Christian’s friends, among them Andreas Gieseke, son of the Fire Commissioner and now <i>studiosus juris</i>; also Stephan and Edward Kistenmacher, of Kistenmacher and Son. They danced in the dining-room and the hall, which had been strewn with talc for the occasion. Among the liveliest of the lively was Consul Peter Döhlmann; he got hold of all the earthenware crocks he could find and broke them on the flags of the big passage.</p>
			<p>Frau Stuht from Bell-Founders’ Street had another opportunity to mingle in the society of the great; for it was she who helped Mamsell Jungmann and the two seamstresses to adjust Tony’s toilette on the great day. She had, as God was her judge, never seen a more beautiful bride. Fat as she was, she went on her knees; and, with her eyes rolled up in admiration, fastened the myrtle twigs on the white moiré antique. This was in the breakfast-room. Herr Grünlich, in his long-skirted frock-coat and silk waistcoat, waited at the door. His rosy face had a correct and serious expression, his wart was powdered, and his gold-yellow whiskers carefully curled.</p>
			<p>Above in the hall, where the marriage was to take place, the family gathered⁠—a stately assemblage. There sat the old Krögers, a little ailing both of them, but distinguished figures always. There was Consul Kröger with his sons Jürgen and Jacob, the latter having come from Hamburg, like the Duchamps. There were Gottfried Buddenbrook and his wife, born Stüwing, with their three offspring, Friederike, Henriette, and Pfiffi, none of whom was, unfortunately, likely to marry. There was the Mecklenburg branch, represented by Clothilde’s father, Herr Bernhard Buddenbrook, who had come in from Thankless and looked with large eyes at the seignorial house of his rich relations. The relatives from Frankfort had contented themselves with sending presents; the journey was too arduous. In their place were the only guests not members of the family. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Grabow, the family physician, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Weichbrodt, Tony’s motherly friend⁠—Sesemi Weichbrodt, with fresh ribbons on her cap over the side-curls, and a little black dress. “Be happy, you good child,” she said, when Tony appeared at Herr Grünlich’s side in the hall. She reached up and kissed her with a little explosion on the forehead. The family was satisfied with the bride: Tony looked pretty, gay, and at her ease, if a little pale from excitement and tension.</p>
			<p>The hall had been decorated with flowers and an altar arranged on the right side. Pastor Kölling of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s performed the service, and laid special stress upon moderation. Everything went according to custom and arrangement, Tony brought out a hearty yes, and Herr Grünlich gave his little ahem, beforehand, to clear his throat. Afterward, everybody ate long and well.</p>
			<p>While the guests continued to eat in the salon, with the pastor in their midst, the Consul and his wife accompanied the young pair, who had dressed for their journey, out into the snowy, misty air, where the great travelling coach stood before the door, packed with boxes and bags.</p>
			<p>After Tony had expressed many times her conviction that she should soon be back again on a visit, and that they too would not delay long to come to Hamburg to see her, she climbed in good spirits into the coach and let herself be carefully wrapped up by the Consul in the warm fur rug. Her husband took his place by her side.</p>
			<p>“And, Grünlich,” said the Consul, “the new laces are in the small satchel, on top. You take a little in under your overcoat, don’t you? This excise⁠—one has to get around it the best one can. Farewell, farewell! Farewell, dear Tony. God bless you.”</p>
			<p>“You will find good accommodation in Arensburg, won’t you?” asked the Frau Consul. “Already reserved, my dear Mamma,” answered Herr Grünlich.</p>
			<p>Anton, Line, Trine, and Sophie took leave of Ma’am Grünlich. The coach door was about to be slammed, when Tony was overtaken by a sudden impulse. Despite all the trouble it took, she unwound herself again from her wrappings, climbed ruthlessly over Herr Grünlich, who began to grumble, and embraced her Father with passion. “Adieu, Papa, adieu, my good Papa.” And then she whispered softly: “Are you satisfied with me?”</p>
			<p>The Consul pressed her without words to his heart, then put her from him and shook her hands with deep feeling.</p>
			<p>Now everything was ready. The coach door slammed, the coachman cracked his whip, the horses dashed away so that the coach windows rattled; the Frau Consul let fly her little white handkerchief; and the carriage, rolling down the street, disappeared in the mist.</p>
			<p>The Consul stood thoughtfully next to his wife, who drew her cloak about her shoulders with a graceful movement.</p>
			<p>“There she goes, Betsy.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Jean, the first to leave us. Do you think she is happy with him?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Betsy, she is satisfied with herself, which is better; it is the most solid happiness we can have on this earth.”</p>
			<p>They went back to their guests.</p>
			<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
