<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p><span class="smcap">And</span> now came, in two great cut-glass dishes, the “Plettenpudding.” It was made of layers of macaroons, raspberries, lady-fingers, and custard. At the same time, at the other end of the table, appeared the blazing plum-pudding which was the children’s favourite sweet.</p>
			<p>“Thomas, my son, come here a minute,” said Johann Buddenbrook, taking his great bunch of keys from his trousers pocket. “In the second cellar to the right, the second bin, behind the red Bordeaux, two bottles⁠—you understand?” Thomas, to whom such orders were familiar, ran off and soon came back with the two bottles, covered with dust and cobwebs; and the little dessert-glasses were filled with sweet, golden-yellow malmsey from these unsightly receptacles. Now the moment came when Pastor Wunderlich rose, glass in hand, to propose a toast; and the company fell silent to listen. He spoke in the pleasant, conversational tone which he liked to use in the pulpit; his head a little on one side, a subtle, humorous smile on his pale face, gesturing easily with his free hand. “Come, my honest friends, let us honour ourselves by drinking a glass of this excellent liquor to the health of our host and hostess in their beautiful new home. Come, then⁠—to the health of the Buddenbrook family, present and absent! May they live long and prosper!”</p>
			<p>“Absent?” thought the Consul to himself, bowing as the company lifted their glasses. “Is he referring to the Frankfort Buddenbrooks, or perhaps the Duchamps in Hamburg⁠—or did old Wunderlich really mean something by that?” He stood up and clinked glasses with his father, looking him affectionately in the eye.</p>
			<p>Broker Gratjens got up next, and his speech was rather long-winded; he ended by proposing in his high-pitched voice a health to the firm of Johann Buddenbrook, that it might continue to grow and prosper and do honour to the town.</p>
			<p>Johann Buddenbrook thanked them all for their kindness, first as head of the family and then as senior partner of the firm⁠—and sent Thomas for another bottle of Malmsey. It had been a mistake to suppose that two would be enough.</p>
			<p>Lebrecht Kröger spoke too. He took the liberty of remaining seated, because it looked less formal, and gestured with his head and hands most charmingly as he proposed a toast to the two ladies of the family, Madame Antoinette and the Frau Consul. As he finished, the Plettenpudding was nearly consumed, and the Malmsey nearing its end; and then, to a universal, long-drawn “Ah-h!” Jean Jacques Hoffstede rose up slowly, clearing his throat. The children clapped their hands with delight.</p>
			<p>“<i>Excusez!</i> I really couldn’t help it,” he began. He put his finger to his long sharp nose and drew a paper from his coat pocket.⁠ ⁠… A profound silence reigned throughout the room.</p>
			<p>His paper was gaily parti-coloured. On the outside of it was written, in an oval border surrounded by red flowers and a profusion of gilt flourishes:</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>“<i>On the occasion of my friendly participation in a delightful house-warming party given by the Buddenbrook family. October 1835.</i>”</p>
			</div>
			<p>He read this aloud first; then turning the paper over, he began, in a voice that was already somewhat tremulous:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container">
				<div class="poetry">
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="verse">Honoured friends, my modest lay</div>
						<div class="verse">Hastes to greet you in these walls:</div>
						<div class="verse">May kind Heaven grant to-day</div>
						<div class="verse">Blessing on their spacious halls.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="verse">Thee, my friend with silver hair,</div>
						<div class="verse">And thy faithful, loving spouse,</div>
						<div class="verse">And your children young and fair⁠—</div>
						<div class="verse">I salute you, and your house.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="verse">Industry and beauty chaste</div>
						<div class="verse">See we linked in marriage band:</div>
						<div class="verse">Venus Anadyomene</div>
						<div class="verse">And cunning Vulcan’s busy hand.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="verse">May no future storms dismay</div>
						<div class="verse">With unkind blast the joyful hour;</div>
						<div class="verse">May each new returning day</div>
						<div class="verse">Blessings on your pathway shower.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="verse">Ceaselessly shall I rejoice</div>
						<div class="verse">O’er the fortune that is yours:</div>
						<div class="verse">As to-day I lift my voice,</div>
						<div class="verse">May I still, while life endures.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="verse">In your splendid walls live well,</div>
						<div class="verse">And cherish with affection true</div>
						<div class="verse">Him who in his humble cell</div>
						<div class="verse">Penned to-day these lines for you</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>He bowed to a unanimous outburst of applause.</p>
			<p>“Charming, Hoffstede,” cried old Buddenbrook. “It was too charming for words. I drink your health.”</p>
			<p>But when the Frau Consul touched glasses with the poet, a delicate blush mantled her cheek; for she had seen the courtly bow he made in her direction when he came to the part about the Venus Anadyomene.</p>
			<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
